[Amit Varma]: One of the lessons we learn in life is that we should not invest in things, but in experiences,
[Amit Varma]: knowledge and relationships. I've been thinking about one particular kind of relationship
[Amit Varma]: recently. Friendship. What is a friendship? What makes people friends? I was sitting the
[Amit Varma]: other day with a friend of mine who comes over about once a year, and he said that to
[Amit Varma]: him, friendship meant that you could sit with someone for a long time, and neither of you
[Amit Varma]: felt the need to say anything. You were both in that time, comfortable in your own skins
[Amit Varma]: and comfortable in that shared space. Another quality of friendship that I value is that
[Amit Varma]: you can be yourself with a friend. There are no filters, and this should apply for both
[Amit Varma]: people. I realized that with some friends, we could just say what we wanted to each other,
[Amit Varma]: no offense taken, no hidden narratives. But with others, I had the sense that they held
[Amit Varma]: back, that they weighed their words and actions, that they thought things about you that they
[Amit Varma]: wouldn't actually say to you. And sometimes they wouldn't even assume goodwill, which
[Amit Varma]: is a cardinal rule of every conversation or relationship with me, that you assume the
[Amit Varma]: other person means well, unless you have concrete reason not to. I decided to try to be less
[Amit Varma]: and less with this kind of person. It takes away too much mental energy to be so calculating
[Amit Varma]: about friendships to be getting meta about what another person may be thinking. Friendships
[Amit Varma]: are also different depending on gender. Men carry this burden of masculinity, you're not
[Amit Varma]: supposed to express your emotions. And sometimes that may even stop you from expressing your
[Amit Varma]: feelings to yourself. Another question that strikes me about friendship is how it forms.
[Amit Varma]: Back in the days before the internet, you were restricted by geography to communities
[Amit Varma]: of circumstance. Today, we can form communities of choice. But can a friendship be virtual?
[Amit Varma]: Can you feel close to a person you've never met? And you may not even know what they look
[Amit Varma]: like. I've had reason to think about that as well. I don't have answers to all these
[Amit Varma]: questions. But I do know that I should not take friendships for granted, as perhaps I
[Amit Varma]: used to once. The material things in our life, they are cold and only there to serve a purpose.
[Amit Varma]: The people we surround ourselves with, they make all this worthwhile.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Amit Varma]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Bharma. Welcome to the scene and the unseen. My guest
[Amit Varma]: today is my old India friend Chandra Harsh Chaudhary. We met as colleagues in the early
[Amit Varma]: 2000s at Crick Info. We were both early bloggers. He went on to a flourishing career as a literary
[Amit Varma]: critic and book reviewer. He wrote three novels, edited different anthologies and wrote a charming
[Amit Varma]: book of literary and personal essays called My Country is Literature. I'll link all of
[Amit Varma]: these from the show notes. We used to hang out a lot together in the aughties, but I've
[Amit Varma]: come to like and respect him more and more as the years have gone by. With Harsh, as
[Amit Varma]: his friends call him, what you see is what you get. There is not a shred of artifice
[Amit Varma]: to him. He is always true to himself and to the moment he is in. He also engages deeply
[Amit Varma]: with the world, whether he's writing or cooking or reading. And maybe this begins by his engaging
[Amit Varma]: deeply with literature. He is one of the best readers I know. I feel I have a lot to learn
[Amit Varma]: from Harsh about reading and writing and literature, but the conversation you will now hear, I
[Amit Varma]: mean, I hope you'll hear it, covers a lot of other ground as well. It gave me a lot
[Amit Varma]: to think about and I hope you enjoy it as well.
[Amit Varma]: Have you always wanted to be a writer but never quite gotten down to it? Well, I'd love
[Amit Varma]: to help you. Since April 2020, I've taught 20 cohorts of my online course, The Art of
[Amit Varma]: Clear Writing. An online community has now sprung up of all my past students. We have
[Amit Varma]: workshops, a newsletter to showcase the work of students and vibrant community interaction.
[Amit Varma]: In the course itself, through four webinars spread over four weekends, I share all I know
[Amit Varma]: about the craft and practice of clear writing. There are many exercises, much interaction,
[Amit Varma]: a lovely and lively community at the end of it. The course costs Rs. 10,000 plus GST or
[Amit Varma]: about $150 and is a monthly thing. So if you're interested, head on over to register at IndiaUncut.com
[Amit Varma]: slash clear writing. That's IndiaUncut.com slash clear writing. Being a good writer doesn't require God given
[Amit Varma]: talent, just the willingness to work hard and a clear idea of what you need to do to
[Amit Varma]: refine your skills. I can help you.
[Amit Varma]: Chandrahas, welcome to the scene and the unseen. So happy to be here. So I was reading your
[Amit Varma]: excellent introductory essay in your book, My Country is Literature. And a lot of memories
[Amit Varma]: also came back because you you've sort of written in that about your young years in
[Amit Varma]: Bombay as a young writer and working and we were colleagues at that time. And those were
[Amit Varma]: sort of early years for me as well. Yeah, right. And we're both finding our feet and
[Amit Varma]: maybe in a sense, finding ourselves as a sort of people. And when we met outside, you told
[Amit Varma]: me something very interesting, like, like you mentioned how you met a mutual friend
[Amit Varma]: of ours from Crickin for Rahul Bhattacharya recently in Calcutta. So shout out to him.
[Amit Varma]: I thought of you back then when you were both in Crickin for us young whippersnappers. And
[Amit Varma]: it's difficult for me to make the mental adjustment where I now, now you're middle aged men, kind
[Amit Varma]: of like we are like myself. And, and you said something interesting. You said that, however,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you will always think of me as someone in his early 30s. Because that's when you
[Amit Varma]: first met me. And I always think of you as a young whippersnapper. And, and to meet old
[Amit Varma]: friends is therefore to be transported back to a different time and place, and so on and
[Amit Varma]: so forth. So for someone who is more social than me, and presumably has more friends than
[Amit Varma]: me, tell me a little bit about, you know, your view of friendships, because I had a
[Amit Varma]: guest on the show, Abhinandan Sekri, who said something very interesting. He said after
[Amit Varma]: the age of 25, he's not made any friends, everyone he knows is from before that, I find
[Amit Varma]: with me is almost the other way around. And partly because of course, internet and everything
[Amit Varma]: that happened exposed me to a whole bunch of new people, but also because I changed
[Amit Varma]: a lot. And therefore anyone who would have been in my friend at 20, God knows why that
[Amit Varma]: would have been the case for them. You know, I'm a totally different person. So what's
[Amit Varma]: your view of this?
[Guest]: Well, I think it's a great question to start off on because I'm a late arrival on your
[Guest]: show. What is it? Episode 200 something. But I'm not sure a lot of your guests have the
[Guest]: same history that you and I have, isn't it? And that is something to remember and celebrate
[Guest]: because as I recall, we met for the first time, although I'd read you before, and perhaps
[Guest]: you might have just heard of me, new arrival in the office. We met in the last week of
[Guest]: June 2003, only about a five minute auto ride from where we're sitting right now in your
[Guest]: studio. So in a sense, it's a full circle for us today after nearly 20 years, and I
[Guest]: was 23 and so excited to be having my first job. And I think you had been around a while
[Guest]: and had this kind of star appeal for the younger writers because you were, I think you, there's
[Guest]: six years between us, you were 29. And just as you're sitting across this table now, perhaps
[Guest]: there was double the distance between us, but for some reason fate, and there is such
[Guest]: a thing as fate, I do believe now, at least like life seems to have taught me so, fate
[Guest]: had put us in one line. And as I recall at the time, you know, it was, it's a shock for
[Guest]: anybody, any young person out of university to start to go to work and realize that whatever
[Guest]: that that glamour that attach itself to that world from outside, you know, collapses very,
[Guest]: very swiftly, especially when you find out how having an afternoon nap is frowned on.
[Guest]: But I think we used to, my default gesture in at work the two years I was there was to
[Guest]: turn right. Oh, and as you used to keep saying to auto drivers when you used to go leftward
[Guest]: ho jaye hain, leftist ho jaye hain. So, you turned right to me.
[Guest]: You turned left and we would discuss some New Yorker piece or some essay, my passions,
[Guest]: your passions, which have always been quite different, but we have enjoyed sharing them
[Guest]: and sometimes facing off, you know, with our position and enjoying that disputatiousness.
[Guest]: And actually, yeah, this is also the time speaking of friendship, maybe I'll say a few
[Guest]: things about friendship in general before segwaying back, which is that, I mean, first
[Guest]: of all, to finish my point here, is there anything so consoling and fulfilling and sweet
[Guest]: in life as old friendships rekindled or, you know, you don't have to say anything. I find
[Guest]: lots of times when I see my friends now after the first thrill of chat for hours and hours,
[Guest]: you lapse into a kind of companionable silence. You don't need to say a lot to each other.
[Guest]: You just but it's enjoyable to inhabit the same space and, you know, just say a word
[Guest]: or two or look at each other, things like that. And my dream is, you know, everybody
[Guest]: has a dream. I would love to, at some point in my life, live in a street where all my
[Guest]: friends lived in houses down the street. Although I know, you know, your friends, as you must
[Guest]: also know, the friends, your friends are necessarily not friends of each other. And they can cause
[Guest]: conflict by sometimes, you know, so that way life always gives you one extra problem to
[Guest]: solve every time you solve something. But I think in my life, as it's turned out, friendship
[Guest]: has a very, very big place. And in the end, I think it is the defining category of human
[Guest]: communication. Love is a very big thing. Friendship is also a kind of love. But since in our culture,
[Guest]: the word love has sort of been, leans a bit towards either romantic love or the love for
[Guest]: parents and for family. In the end, I think friendship is a more egalitarian and democratic
[Guest]: ideal where you can be friends with anybody at half an hour. You know, some of the deepest
[Guest]: chats of my life have been people I've never seen more than once. And in that sense, I
[Guest]: think it's so liberating to realize that you don't, friendship need not be a function of
[Guest]: time. It just needs to be a function of energy and attitude and the wonderful serendipity
[Guest]: of life, which I think as 20th century people, you know, born in the 60s and 70s, we've had
[Guest]: the great fortune to enjoy an ease of range and reach that perhaps our fathers or mothers
[Guest]: perhaps having the same instincts would never would have had to live in much smaller social
[Guest]: spheres. So I think in that sense, Bombay is very important to me as the very difficult
[Guest]: learning ground of friendship because in my 20s, just like you, I was perhaps a bit more
[Guest]: much more introverted and I really struggled to make relationships other than the ones
[Guest]: I relied on. And reflexively, when you want to see somebody, you'd go back to someone
[Guest]: you already knew. You never look to. But I thought I'd finish by reading a small passage
[Guest]: from my new book, My Country's Literature, which actually has to do with you. And in
[Guest]: a way, it's also about what I owe you because, you know, like every young person, I firmly
[Guest]: believe that, you know, every young person, whether man or woman, needs somebody a touch
[Guest]: older to hold your hand a bit of the way because you really don't know. That's the thing about
[Guest]: being young. You don't know what lies ahead of you. And I always remember it was very
[Guest]: generous of you suddenly to give away one of your two very famous blogs at the time.
[Guest]: You had India Uncut in the middle stage and you were away, I think, doing the Cyclone
[Guest]: perhaps in the Tsunami in Chennai. Why didn't you just post a few things while I'm gone?
[Guest]: And I really obviously took to it because every young writer thirsts for an audience
[Guest]: and not having an audience and suddenly finding I had one which is your audience. I suddenly
[Guest]: realized what a great pleasure it was. And you could have always said, you know, now
[Guest]: you start off on your own, but you gave me your house, so to speak, virtually. And this
[Guest]: is my memory in my book, this little memoir. So there's one paragraph about about this.
[Guest]: The sudden mushrooming of a literary subculture in the early years of the 2000s, a subculture
[Guest]: of personal web blogs also provided an escape from constrictions of the formal book review
[Guest]: and the mainstream media. I entered this realm under the benign supervision of one of the
[Guest]: great influences of my life in my 20s, the Mumbai writer Amit Verma, first encountered
[Guest]: during my two year stint in the offices of Cricinfo, where his desk was exactly across
[Guest]: the aisle from mine. All day long, we exchanged snippets of conversation about cricket, American
[Guest]: journalism, novels, Bombay, and the meaning of freedom, both in the standard and this
[Guest]: was a Verma pet cause in the libertarian sense of the word. While after 5 p.m. when restrictions
[Guest]: were lifted, we tussled with bat and rubber ball in ferocious test matches down the very
[Guest]: same corridor, thereby spending our day across the two axis of a sort of cross. My literary
[Guest]: web blog, the middle stage is actually a space that he had set up, created a readership for
[Guest]: and then generously conceded once I'd written a few guest posts for it. So I think this
[Guest]: is the chance to say on your show. Thank you. I mean, I know that many people can thank
[Guest]: you for all sorts of things. No one can thank you for this.
[Amit Varma]: No, thank you. I mean, when I first read that, I have to confess, I almost teared up because
[Amit Varma]: I would not have imagined I would be that anyone would describe me as an influence.
[Amit Varma]: I think you know, so many would you are being a little too self-deprecating. No, I mean,
[Amit Varma]: I should own your influence. I think back on myself at that time. And I wonder how can
[Amit Varma]: those who are lost lead others. That's sort of what it feels like. But the cricket was,
[Amit Varma]: of course, great fun. And we used to play with this little ball, which was halfway between
[Amit Varma]: plastic and a squeezy ball. And I had mastered this particular sort of imparting forward
[Amit Varma]: and backward spin on it. And that forward spin would rush across at great pace.
[Guest]: You are the only spin swing baller in the history of cricket.
[Amit Varma]: In the history of cricket and Rahul Dravid came once to our office. I bowled three balls
[Amit Varma]: to him. The first one was a wide, the next one he was bold. And then he said, then he
[Amit Varma]: called me Shoaib and refused to play anymore. And I was thinking Shoaib chucks, I'm not
[Amit Varma]: even, I'm not chucking, it's my fingers. No, no, but you were, of course, a far better
[Amit Varma]: player than me. And you've actually played at a decent level. You played for Trinity
[Guest]: College. Yeah, it wasn't a decent level. It was a decent environment rather. There's nothing
[Guest]: more pleasurable. Although I haven't played for many years then, you know, cricket English
[Guest]: summer afternoon with the blue sky and white clouds above and the green grass below. And
[Guest]: especially I mean, this is what I realized is strange. The sound that a new ball makes
[Guest]: in the air as you bowl it, not too fast clearly in my case, but you can even listen to it
[Guest]: going down, but it makes a little sound like a cricket. And then, you know, either it goes
[Guest]: past the bat or it makes a much bigger sound as it gets sent off somewhere into the wilds.
[Guest]: But yeah, it was such a big part of my life that I think in the end, like with so many
[Guest]: things when I renounced it, I did it completely. I left no doors open for it to sneak in anywhere.
[Amit Varma]: In your footnotes to this where you mentioned me here, you said that you have described
[Amit Varma]: your time with me and other mutual friends like Sonia and Rahul and all that in an essay
[Amit Varma]: called the drinking companions of my youth, which I googled for frantically and did not
[Amit Varma]: find it. And you have now told me it was made up. But while googling for it, I actually
[Amit Varma]: came across a piece where you and I share a byline, which we wrote together, apparently
[Amit Varma]: 26 October 2003 for Crickinfo. And it is a bizarre piece to co write with someone because
[Amit Varma]: it's like really short and it's the title of the piece is two men who left her man alone.
[Amit Varma]: Yes, I think it's a bit of stats analysis we did together. Yes, yes, yes, that's right.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And it was very weird. I'm looking at it and I can't figure out which part could
[Amit Varma]: be yours, which part could be mine, how we did this. I have zero memory of it. And the
[Amit Varma]: writing is a little callow. So it's probably me.
[Guest]: I was even callower than you. Let us not compete for callowness now.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, in our youth, let us not compete for callowness. No, the other the interesting
[Amit Varma]: thing about your essay is one thing that I found is whenever I've had old friends on
[Amit Varma]: the show, who I've known before, and really from blogging times, I find that I discover
[Unknown]: little aspects of them that I had never known. So you know, I could be friends with someone
[Amit Varma]: for 1516 years and never understood this. And this, this essay, for example, gave me
[Amit Varma]: not just obviously more knowledge about all the things you did in the years when we, you
[Amit Varma]: know, weren't colleagues or whatever, but even gave me context for those years. Because
[Amit Varma]: sure, you worked with me in Crick and Forge, but I, you know, I had no context of where
[Amit Varma]: it is in your life or the journey that you're on, or what's happening and all of that. So
[Amit Varma]: in the spirit of finding out more about old friends, I'll ask you to kind of take me back
[Amit Varma]: all the way, take me back to your childhood, like wherever you were born, what was your
[Unknown]: childhood like? Tell me a bit about that.
[Guest]: Well, um, I mean, I'm trying to think of what is interesting about my biography, that is
[Amit Varma]: a better and rather than just over the...
[Amit Varma]: I think you could suffer the curse of knowledge here. And you could think that things which
[Amit Varma]: feel banal and commonplace to you could be interesting to others.
[Guest]: So yes, well, let's put it this way. I think the most the as I look back on my life now
[Guest]: at nearly 42, I think the most durable influences of my first 12 or 13 years, I think where
[Guest]: my parents' marriage and the circumstances in which they married, obviously, I didn't
[Guest]: know until I was a bit older. But I remember a day when we moved to Orissa, I grew up in
[Guest]: several small towns around India, and my parents used to work in LIC. I remember one day they
[Guest]: got posted back to Orissa, which is where my parents are from. And one day, my mother
[Guest]: said, Come, let's go somewhere. And we got into a cycle rickshaw and we went somewhere
[Guest]: and stopped outside her house. And she rang the bell. And two old people came toodling
[Guest]: out, you know, like those dolls in a play. And I looked a little questioning and mother
[Guest]: who are these and said, This is my mommy and daddy. And the very fact that I had never
[Guest]: occurred to me that your parents are parents showed what a gap there was in the very unusual
[Guest]: in the India of the time between my parents and my and the people above them. So I think
[Guest]: my mother and father met at training school in LIC and decided to get married very much
[Guest]: against my mother's parents wishes because she was a high caste and my father was. Looking
[Guest]: back now, I never asked him out because he passed away when I was 22. But this must have
[Guest]: been very upsetting for my father as a man who grew up in a village and really made his
[Guest]: way up in the world and was the first person in his family to go to university, I think
[Guest]: to be rejected without even being interviewed, so to speak for the role. So they always had
[Guest]: very fractious relationship and really could never sort out the issues. You know, it was
[Guest]: very and looking back now, you know, as at our confusions in our 20s, you think when
[Guest]: you get married at that age and you have lost that layer above you, people to help you with
[Guest]: your troubles, how can you make it? The chances are very, very low. So that was our environment
[Guest]: at home as a result of which perhaps I became very bookish in that. That was my one source
[Guest]: of consolation growing up. And my father was tremendously, I've written about him in my
[Guest]: book for the first time, I think, in detail. He was a tremendously dynamic and inspiring
[Guest]: figure who suddenly transplanted his dreams onto me. My son will be a writer. I don't
[Guest]: think I can, but you know, I can groom this. So I had books on tap, which is wonderful
[Guest]: for a middle class family at that time. And my father was very proud of me. And he actually
[Guest]: used to say to me, you should write every day. And when I started doing it, then you
[Guest]: would say now you can't let up. Now you've, I was almost like, you know, that what is
[Guest]: called a pathway dependency in economics. I know you like economic concepts. I've prepared
[Amit Varma]: two or three to throw in.
[Guest]: Oh my God. I'm utterly terrified. I hope I understand what you mean when you use them.
[Guest]: By age 12, I was in a pathway dependent state, you know, having done all the groundwork to
[Guest]: become a writer under my father's careful supervision. But I think spiritually and in
[Guest]: a way romantically, I think the greatest love affair of my life began on June 28, 1989,
[Guest]: when we arrived in Bombay for the first time. My parents had gotten transferred here. We
[Guest]: moved to a small apartment in Borivali. And I think to live in, I've forgotten now exactly
[Guest]: when you arrived in Bombay. It was sometime during the 90s, I'm sure. I think to live
[Guest]: in Bombay during the 90s was to have an amazing kind of education in a certain kind of Indianness
[Guest]: and a certain kind of life and a certain kind of urbanism and a certain kind of multiculturalism.
[Guest]: And all those things sort of subconsciously, although it was a very fractious decade in
[Guest]: Bombay, a very dark decade. And perhaps you might say we have never completely gone past
[Guest]: 1992 and the riots of 92 in some ways, we have become a more ghettoized city. Even so
[Guest]: for a young person, it was a tremendous education for whatever my parents could manage. And
[Guest]: from then on, I've always had a special feeling for Bombay, because although I love Delhi
[Guest]: as well, I've written an essay about both cities. When a city has claim over your childhood,
[Guest]: no city of an adulthood can match it, because those feelings go past your ability to rationally
[Guest]: analyze them at the time. So there was a special charge and beauty that you will never get
[Guest]: from the time you're an adult. And in that way, even now, if I have been in Bombay the
[Guest]: last week, all I want to do, I make plans to meet friends, but all I really want to
[Guest]: do is take buses and trains randomly and look at buildings and pull up my memories, you
[Guest]: know, through chance. So that I think is my childhood. And then I think I went to Xavier's
[Guest]: like perhaps you also. I went to Xavier's for a bit where perhaps there was no distinction
[Guest]: about that, except that I'm perhaps met the first, the first really good writer of my
[Guest]: life, one on one, not with my father's intervention, because my father did intervene. And he was
[Guest]: very happy to come to Bombay, because it felt like now there's access to all these Bombay
[Guest]: writers. I've written about a few of them in the book. But I met Eunice D'Souza, who
[Guest]: was a very interesting and intriguing presence at the time. She was like no teacher I'd met
[Guest]: before. First of all, she was hugely sarcastic, and always look bored with you, you know,
[Guest]: so you almost had to work to impress her. And I didn't spend a lot of time under supervision,
[Guest]: but I could see that there was something very interesting about her. And what was interesting
[Guest]: about her seemed to come from literature. And this was an interesting insight that,
[Guest]: you know, you read books. I don't think I knew a lot of other literary people then that
[Guest]: you read books to sort of also grow a certain secret kind of self that can't, is not easily
[Guest]: readable by the world. And I think this is a good model for a teacher to follow. Do not
[Guest]: give yourself away completely. Keep something in reserve to, not out of a deliberate strategy,
[Guest]: but just because, you know, it should be hard work to realize all the things that are there,
[Guest]: the doorways that can open. It can't be an open, you cannot be an open book, so to speak.
[Amit Varma]: The passages you wrote about your father in that essay are of course very, you know, move
[Amit Varma]: me a lot. And in some ways, it reminded me of my own dad, who died last year, who had
[Amit Varma]: a perhaps a more privileged path than your dad did. You speak about how, you know, your
[Amit Varma]: dad wanted you to rise. You write, I'll just quote that bit where you say about your father,
[Amit Varma]: quote, he wanted me to rise above our middle class life in the same proportion as he had
[Amit Varma]: risen into it. Stop quote, you know, you talk about how he gets you books, his great generosity
[Amit Varma]: with books, and how he would go, you know, try to promote your early writing, go and
[Amit Varma]: meet different writers, ask them for advice and all of that. I was also struck by this
[Amit Varma]: interesting sentence where you wrote, quote, your father will always love you, but you
[Amit Varma]: must also earn his respect, stop quote. And when you kind of shape yourself and you think
[Amit Varma]: about the things that you want in life, how much were they kind of shaped by that, shaped
[Amit Varma]: by the direction that your father was pushing you towards and the dream that he saw for
[Amit Varma]: you. And is that something, is that a thought that you go back to?
[Guest]: Yes, you know, actually that line, your father will always love you, but you must earn his
[Guest]: respect. I mean, did you find yourself thinking when you read it, is it something that I was
[Guest]: interpreting his attitude or was it something he said? It's not clear who says it.
[Amit Varma]: No, in the sense that you say, that's what I thought in the passage that.
[Guest]: Yes, but you know, this actually writing novels gives you a certain ability to use indirect
[Guest]: speech to actually.
[Guest]: You were using free indirect.
[Guest]: Yes, it's actually something my father said to me, you know, and at the time it was something
[Guest]: that made me think a lot. And what does this actually mean? You know, you're too naive
[Guest]: to work out, but what does it mean that like respect? And so is this something different
[Guest]: from, does it mean there's two levels of relationship? I can achieve both or only one? Yes. And
[Guest]: you know, one never loses one's parents inheritance as Indians, who should know this better than
[Guest]: us Indians. But that inheritance, I think that's why I wanted to write about him here
[Guest]: because his inheritance is very complicated and I've spent my entire life unpicking the
[Guest]: good bits on the bad ones. It was by no means uniformly benign or generous or, you know,
[Guest]: there was always also an element of competition in it and of pressure of control as it is
[Guest]: with many parents. And sadly, he didn't live long enough for us to be able to have a conversation
[Guest]: about it. So, you know, these are mental conversations you have. And actually, I feel, you know,
[Guest]: the older you grow, and especially if you work in art, you realize the dead are never
[Guest]: really dead in so many ways. I mean, even this line can be interpreted in a hundred
[Guest]: different ways, but you can actually make peace with somebody even afterwards when it's
[Guest]: a bit too late. And in that sense, I think in the last few years, I found myself having
[Guest]: a very interesting conversation with my father in a sort of imaginative space where I don't
[Guest]: feel there is that trauma or that difficulty anymore. And in that way, I think what I really
[Guest]: credit him for is being a tremendously interesting and dynamic man in a way that I actually find
[Guest]: myself in a bizarre way resembling him more and more. And it's so strange that you do
[Guest]: it so long. Your father wants you to be like him, but you're not going to let him have
[Guest]: that gift easily. And in that way, you know, I think it actually leads me to the issue
[Guest]: of whether masculinity is the same kind of burden or training or inheritance to bear
[Guest]: as femininity is. Do women go through the same kinds of learning and conflicts with
[Guest]: their mothers as men do with their fathers? I would perhaps say we need not equalize it
[Guest]: to this extent. There could be very specific kinds of things that you only go through that
[Guest]: is true for one gender. It did leave me with the problem, though, I think both of having
[Guest]: a very pressuring man in charge of me all of my childhood and then him suddenly disappearing
[Guest]: when I became an adult and leaving me completely lost about how to deal with all those things
[Guest]: that you are then ready for, which would never be at the age of 12 or 13. And of course,
[Guest]: one never knows this at the time. You can only look back and find these things out.
[Guest]: That's the whole thing about life that, you know, many of its truths appear only when
[Guest]: the train has long left the station. And so then what is one supposed to do? One cannot
[Guest]: make up for lost time, but you can build on it, relive it, take something away from it
[Guest]: that you had lost sight of and give something back, perhaps seeing other people in the same
[Guest]: place and realizing that now you have the key to open the doors of their difficulties.
[Guest]: And then you should not stop, I think. One should perhaps even risk it. One should risk
[Guest]: being rejected by the other person saying you are coming on too strongly, perhaps to
[Guest]: say, you know, let us, you know, this is something that I can help you with, I find. So in that
[Guest]: way, the masculinity is also, you know, a tradition and I feel perhaps we, I mean, in
[Guest]: the same way meeting you today, I feel, you know, there's so much to talk about because
[Guest]: now that we are older, there's so many more barriers that have disappeared between us
[Guest]: than that we don't need to, I think, correct me if I'm wrong, but, you know, I left Krigin
[Guest]: for after two years, but we stayed in touch a lot. We used to meet almost every week.
[Guest]: There was also perhaps, you know, in a very good way, there was something competitive
[Guest]: between us. Your essay this week, your blog post this week, what readers used to comment
[Guest]: on mine as soon as, used to upset each other sometimes with their attitudes. And I'm sure
[Guest]: both of us suddenly thought hundreds of times, the truth is so clear, why doesn't he get
[Guest]: the whole point? But there are many truths and there are some truths which you can see
[Guest]: depending on where you come from. So in that sense, I think this is the good thing, sort
[Guest]: of entering the second half of life or becoming a bit older. Some things become much easier,
[Guest]: maybe not physically, but mentally and spiritually. And one should take up those things.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, when we were having breakfast, you asked me, you know, in what ways had I
[Amit Varma]: changed? I mentioned that I'm such a different person. And one way certainly is that I was
[Amit Varma]: much more competitive, and I won't even say competitive, maybe that sense of competitiveness
[Amit Varma]: came from a little bit of insecurity as well. And it also came from perhaps, wanting to
[Amit Varma]: be seen and not actually wanting to be, you want to be seen as something that you aspire
[Amit Varma]: to be, but you're not that yet, if that kind of makes any sense.
[Guest]: It's true for so many young people. It's a perfectly natural thing to be at that age.
[Amit Varma]: It's true for all young people, I guess. And we'll come back to masculinity later, because
[Amit Varma]: I want to explore a lot there. But before that, another sort of thought, which is that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, in my dad's last year, I saw him become a very different person from what he
[Amit Varma]: had been. And you mentioned, I think, in a couple of sentences about how your dad also
[Amit Varma]: towards the end, he was more frail, and he had changed a little bit. And I think about
[Amit Varma]: those changes in my dad. And I think that those changes in my dad didn't even come because
[Amit Varma]: of self reflection as they might come sometimes. But partly because of physiology in the sense
[Amit Varma]: that his memory faded through his life. So at the end, all he remembered were the edges,
[Amit Varma]: the childhood and at the end, and everything was a blur. Once he asked me that, you know,
[Unknown]: to describe my growing up years to him, because he didn't remember me as a child, which is
[Amit Varma]: kind of poignant. And then when you spoke about how sort of still remember your father
[Amit Varma]: and have conversations with him. And I thought that even the memories that we have are really
[Amit Varma]: stories we are telling ourselves, we are taking little bits and pieces of what they were and
[Amit Varma]: what we remember. And that's what we are constructing them as, without the baggage of everything
[Amit Varma]: else that we might want to forget. And there is a lot of that too. Yes. To what extent
[Amit Varma]: do you think this is true? Because at one level, it's easy to do when you think of those
[Amit Varma]: who are not with us, because they are gone, and you can shape them in any way you want.
[Amit Varma]: And in another way, they are sort of still with us. And therefore, when we are with them,
[Amit Varma]: they are not just a person, they are now in our interactions, they are also everything
[Guest]: that they have been all this time. Yes, you say our memories of people who are
[Guest]: gone collages of moments that we take, which perhaps not necessarily that significant or
[Guest]: things like that. Or even impressions. And of course, they are significant to us. So
[Guest]: in that sense, they are as real as anything. Yes. Well, first of all, how could it be any
[Guest]: other way? You know, so in a sense, it's not, I mean, for instance, recently, I've found
[Guest]: a new project, when I go back to Orissa, I try to meet people who knew my father when
[Guest]: he was in his 20s. Wow. So they can give me something about him that I would never have
[Guest]: known, even because I wasn't even born then. And they also tremendously, you know, obviously,
[Guest]: they are so full of details, which you could never, I mean, my father was briefly a lecturer
[Guest]: in a college. And, you know, there's always something very idiosyncratic about him. And
[Guest]: I remember my uncle, my mother's younger brother was briefly a student at that college. And
[Guest]: he said, I don't remember anything of your father, except that he's come to class and
[Guest]: read film magazines. Imagine the audacity as a recently appointed lecturer to come and
[Guest]: be reading film for any class, telling the students, you know, he's only a bit older
[Guest]: than them. So in that sense, you know, I'm actually enjoying the task of finding out,
[Guest]: you know, there's so many things that you will come to know. For instance, we never
[Guest]: had a chat about politics. The 90s were a very fraught decade politically. I can't really
[Guest]: say, although I'm thinking a lot, whether you'd be a Congress voter, a BJP voter today,
[Guest]: or in 2002 or 2004, I cannot reclaim or even imagine persuasively some of his choices and
[Guest]: ideas. But, you know, it's just a metaphor for finding things out about life as well.
[Guest]: You know, the past is always much murkier and much more complicated than the stories
[Guest]: your parents have told you. And they've left you with this bag and you've got to go around
[Guest]: filling it up with pebbles on the shore.
[Amit Varma]: Or you empty the bag. Speaking of the past, you know, so I was cleaning up my dad's things,
[Amit Varma]: gave away most of his books, just kept a few, gave away most of them. But I kept some old
[Amit Varma]: diaries that I found of his. And there's one of those diaries, which is really interesting
[Amit Varma]: because it indicates that at some point in his life, I don't know when he wanted to write
[Amit Varma]: as well. And there are ideas for stories in there and all of that. And they're very hesitant.
[Amit Varma]: They're also kind of callow. So I'm assuming that he must have written them when he was
[Amit Varma]: in his 20s or when he was young and before kind of life got in the way. And it's interesting.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, speaking of that bag of pebbles, I think maybe sometimes you just give it away
[Amit Varma]: and kind of get on with it. I'm struck by something I read just yesterday, I think,
[Amit Varma]: which is almost banal, but it came across as interesting with this guy, I think, tweeted
[Amit Varma]: and I'm really sorry, but I've forgotten who, but if I find it, I'll put it in the show
[Amit Varma]: notes where, and may not even have been on Twitter, may have been somewhere else. But
[Amit Varma]: this guy was writing about how a friend of his asked him that how often are you going
[Amit Varma]: to meet your parents in the rest of your life? And he said, what kind of question is that?
[Amit Varma]: And he said, how often do you go home? And he said, I go home once a year. So the guy
[Amit Varma]: said, Oh, then they're in the 60s, right? So on average, you'll meet them whatever 1516
[Amit Varma]: times the rest of your life, which kind of stunned him so much that he moved to live
[Amit Varma]: closer to them. Yeah, which is an interesting thought, because all of us live under this
[Amit Varma]: sort of illusion that we will live forever. And actually, the things that are dear to
[Amit Varma]: us, we perhaps understand their dearness, only after it's gone. And not just in the
[Guest]: context of parents, but anything else. Yes, that is true. We tend to take for granted
[Guest]: what we have. Yes, but but also, as we well know, being too close to one's parents also
[Guest]: has problems of its own. In that sense, I think I have a good relationship with my mother.
[Guest]: You know, we like the story you said, we probably see each other more than once a year for sure.
[Guest]: And for quite long periods of time, but we have another project of her own, which is
[Guest]: that she's my translator in Orya now. Yeah, and she's actually doing a tremendous job.
[Guest]: And she's actually a full fledged writer in her own right. And I love reading what she's
[Guest]: done with my work. And sometimes I love that you're better than me. This is Yeah, fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: So let's go back to your early years. And after you shifted to Bombay, across two levels.
[Amit Varma]: One is what is the stuff that you're reading? What is sort of your reading life shaping
[Amit Varma]: up to be because you mentioned in your essay that you were a, quote, voracious, unsystematic,
[Amit Varma]: dominating reader. And that's one thing that's happening. And just to focus on that, like,
[Amit Varma]: I remember that, you know, initially, you just when I was a kid, and I was reading,
[Amit Varma]: you just read everything, right? Everything is a storybook. And my sense that there was
[Amit Varma]: something more that there was something called literature, something that was worth spending
[Amit Varma]: one's time on came at the age of 10. When I picked up this nice hardback edition of
[Amit Varma]: the House of the Dead by Dostoevsky about his time in Siberia, because the title sounded
[Amit Varma]: funky, right? Yeah, it'll be something interesting. And then of course, got completely switched
[Amit Varma]: on to Dostoevsky read everything by him and all of that and that sort of thing. What are
[Guest]: the age of 10? This is really precautious, bit too early. I also read all of Shakespeare
[Amit Varma]: at the age of 10. So I now realize it. I now realized that I was not reading it as literature
[Amit Varma]: literature, it was affecting me in a different way. But obviously, I didn't have any of the
[Amit Varma]: tools or the life experience to be able to make as much out of it as I would, you know,
[Amit Varma]: when I read it as an adult. But what was that sort of journey for you into books and a understanding
[Amit Varma]: what literature could do and be wanting at some point to write yourself?
[Guest]: Well, I'm, I'm afraid I cannot report anything of the order of Dostoevsky or Shakespeare.
[Guest]: It was books for children, perhaps a touch above my age, you know, when you're 10, you
[Guest]: read the books for 13, when you're 13, you read the books for 15 or whatever. And then
[Guest]: at some point, you know, you get totally caught up with whatever you get on the pavement bookstalls
[Guest]: in Flora Fountain, for which reason I retain this romantic attachment for walking down
[Guest]: those 200-250 tiles of land. And yes, I think it was very voracious, very unsystematic,
[Guest]: but it was thought and this bit I've kept throughout my life that, you know, life is
[Guest]: not worth anything if you're not reading constantly, which is something that many middle class
[Guest]: parents taught you. But I think my father really, I think my father was the only person
[Guest]: who if I said to him, can I miss school today, dad, if I write a poem by the evening and
[Guest]: sit at home, he'd say, okay, that's a trade. No problem. See you, see you in the evening
[Guest]: and you head off to work. My mother would be tremendously upset, of course, you know,
[Guest]: denying the boy education, etc. But that sense of unorthodoxy was what appealed to me about
[Guest]: literature that, you know, it's not a formal system. Everybody studied and worked hard
[Guest]: or whatever, but literature is not a system where the input and outputs can be matched
[Guest]: in this way. It's much more provisional, improvised, unsystematic, hopeful, soulful, and it makes
[Guest]: you a bit of a dreamer and sometimes it makes you too bookish and not set up for dealing
[Guest]: with the problems of life because you kind of retreat at any, for instance, I think for
[Guest]: a lot of my life, I retreated from conflicts because I just thought I can read a book and
[Guest]: sort this out, you know, let me not actually fight with the person involved. But it was,
[Guest]: I think, a tremendous education and between that Bombay and my family situation, which
[Guest]: meant that we have a very high wall between home and the world. It was not just a door
[Guest]: and a house. It was much higher than that. There was an invisible wall that meant people
[Guest]: didn't come to see us. We rarely went to see people. Inside the house, there's always conflict
[Guest]: and different kinds of wars. So I think the only real source of reliable inspiration and
[Guest]: pleasure was one, my relationship with my dad and two books and playing cricket in the
[Guest]: evenings all evening long. So, you know, it's not a bad childhood to have at all and Bombay
[Guest]: on top of that. So that's my memory. And, you know, it's, it can, Bombay has changed
[Guest]: a lot in the early 90s, you know, when India was just liberalizing. And I remember the
[Guest]: day, I mean, I don't know if you were around when McDonald's first started in India. The
[Unknown]: queue was four, five hundred people long. And I even remember the day I drank my first
[Guest]: Coke in a thunderstorm opposite Mitiwai College in a small shop there. So, you know, these
[Guest]: things never leave you. And Bombay is a great, great training school to become a writer.
[Guest]: I can't think there's any better place in the world. I mean, I'm sure there must be.
[Amit Varma]: You mean that in terms of stories that surround you?
[Guest]: Yes, the intensity of stories, the depth of people's feelings and passions and the amount
[Guest]: of things you have to hide or suppress or repress so that you can just get by in the
[Guest]: day for space, love, time, all these things. And the different histories and, you know,
[Guest]: being a colonial city and having a certain kind of architecture, the sea, you know, why
[Guest]: is the favorite metaphor with the unconscious, the sea? No, we actually have a sea. Forget
[Guest]: having the sea of the unconscious. When you put it all together, it's a fantastic, you
[Guest]: know, you don't need to send writers to university, just get them to stay in Bombay for five years
[Guest]: at some age and they'll work it out by themselves.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I think to use sort of fashionable word these days, people who live in Bombay have
[Amit Varma]: normalized it. You know, I guess if you don't want to write that great opportunity is kind
[Amit Varma]: of something you won't even notice. And even the sea, like, I've lived there more than
[Amit Varma]: 20-25 years, I've probably been to the sea a handful of times. I've been to the sea much
[Amit Varma]: more when I go on vacation. You know, kind of right by the sea. By the way, when we were
[Amit Varma]: looking for flats to rent last year, before we took the place where we are right now,
[Amit Varma]: we saw this beautiful flat along that Varsova road, huge flat and for a more affordable
[Amit Varma]: price than this. And the windows were right over the sea, right over the sea, you can
[Amit Varma]: just stand there and there's just sea outside, there's nothing else, it was beautiful. And
[Amit Varma]: eventually we didn't take it because sadly, the other sea that I need in my life is reliable
[Amit Varma]: broadband. And that was in this old building where the building society had made a deal
[Unknown]: with one particular broadband supplier and that never ends well.
[Unknown]: What a tragedy.
[Amit Varma]: So a tragedy for the building. So there's a nice passage here where you talk about your
[Amit Varma]: time in college in Bombay. And you say, quote, it was only at university that the relationship
[Amit Varma]: between literature and literary study, the deep past of literature and the way it flowed
[Amit Varma]: into the present became clear to me, and the world of literary criticism and its possibilities
[Amit Varma]: opened up. Here was a new stage in the reading life, requiring the disenchantment in a technical
[Amit Varma]: sense of the naive reader, stop quote. And by the naive reader, you're, of course, referring
[Amit Varma]: to what Pamuk's formulation of someone who just kind of read everything from Hermann
[Amit Varma]: Hesse to James Hadley Chase, as you describe yourself. So tell me a bit about sort of this,
[Amit Varma]: you know, awakening is a dramatic word, but this sort of shift where you begin to take
[Amit Varma]: books this seriously.
[Guest]: Yes, you know, a BA in English is a very complicated kind of education to have for many Indian
[Guest]: writers, actually, one could devote an entire anthology to the legacies of having such a
[Guest]: degree.
[Guest]: I have one, by the way.
[Amit Varma]: There we go, we have that in common too. And you would also know this thing, you know,
[Guest]: in some way, you become very literary, but also a little too English English in your
[Guest]: English, if you know what I mean. And you feel you have these ideas and concepts and
[Guest]: your models are invariably if you're studying English literature in the old sense, which
[Guest]: is mainly British and these days, American writers, then those are your models. I mean,
[Guest]: transplanting Dickens to Bombay, etc, etc. There's a way in which can be done. But in
[Guest]: the end, you're routing your sensibility through another culture. And then all the way back
[Guest]: again, you can't make that sort of journey and expect things to be very simple. Plus,
[Guest]: you know, many people I know, decide to study English because they love reading, but they
[Guest]: find out on taking the degree that this is precisely what has become so complicated.
[Guest]: Everything is very complicated, you have to analyze everything. As you do so, the pleasure
[Guest]: begins to leach out of the system. And I'll grant you this much, there's nothing like
[Guest]: some kinds of literary critics to make sure that the pleasure disappears because you know,
[Guest]: this is the crisis of English studies and one has never completely gotten out of itself
[Guest]: out of when you try to make it a formal discipline, especially to mimic the sciences and to make
[Guest]: make it look like there's a certain language of literary criticism and a certain method.
[Guest]: In the end, literature does not allow for, you know, applying the same test over and
[Guest]: over again. Also, the critic is always in this kind of competition with the writer to
[Guest]: determine whose sense of the meaning of the work is stronger or better. And that's not
[Guest]: a victory you can win because when you do not know the ways in which creativity works,
[Guest]: it's very hard to analyze it on the reception side. You know, in that way, I think I'm a
[Guest]: better literary critic because I also write novels and know sometimes what a writer is
[Guest]: trying to do in a certain passage or sentence or word or chapter or structure. But I mean,
[Guest]: all these things are in like the sea of literary criticism. And again, you'd find a boat that
[Guest]: somehow you know, navigates those waters and you sail in it and remain happy. And that
[Guest]: was another journey that took me a long, long time to work out it. I cannot write academic
[Guest]: literary criticism, but there's some things in there that actually makes sense. You know,
[Guest]: the idea of the narrator, for instance, I think is very valuable. You know, we in usually
[Guest]: when we many people read a novel, they say that the characters and then the characters
[Guest]: are saying something and the writer's point of view about them is that it's not necessarily
[Guest]: always the writer's point of view, the writer makes up a point of view for the book. So
[Guest]: it's not exactly the writer, it's a unnamed figure, whose voice is controlling the writing
[Guest]: in the book. So when you give that a formal name, the narrator, it clarifies many things
[Guest]: about how power relations in novels work, you know, who takes charge of whose voice
[Guest]: who organizes the material, it's very, very valuable. And to me, you know, it's very helpful
[Guest]: in working on how to write novels. But I found myself then thinking, I cannot stay on in
[Guest]: literary study, I have to use this in some way to become a writer. And that's going to
[Guest]: take another few years. So in the meantime, what do I do? And that's when I came back
[Guest]: to Bombay. And that's when we met, I realized I cannot stay on in the university because
[Guest]: that is going to take me in another completely in a different direction. And I want to live
[Guest]: in the space between writing about books and writing books. And that's how it turned up.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the point that you mentioned about the joy of the book going, you have a lovely
[Amit Varma]: passage about that as well, where you write, quote, I could go only so far in aligning
[Amit Varma]: myself with the values of those newly prominent readers, brackets my critics, who broke down
[Amit Varma]: a text, almost like a doctor studying a blood sample, or interrogating it in the light of
[Amit Varma]: one or other kind of literary theory. Often, it seemed to me, they took an object of delight
[Amit Varma]: and clothed it from top to toe in interpretation, so prolific drone. To be sure there were those
[Amit Varma]: critics who added a glow to a pathway into the writer's work. But more often than not,
[Amit Varma]: they wrestled it down as if dealing with an excitable dog, as if literature for them was
[Amit Varma]: only a stop on the road, and the purpose of literary criticism explicitly to disarm enchantment.
[Amit Varma]: And I want to ask a sort of a broader question here, which is about literature as it is studied
[Amit Varma]: and taught within academia, and literature itself. Like I remember when I was in college,
[Amit Varma]: a good friend of mine decided that he would go abroad and he got admission to study and
[Amit Varma]: he got admission into a place teaching film studies. And he was very passionate about
[Amit Varma]: cinema. So I said, great, you're going abroad to study film studies, this means you're going
[Amit Varma]: to be a filmmaker next. And he laughed and said, No, no, no, I'm never going to make
[Amit Varma]: anything. And I kind of wondered, then what's the point? You know, what are you even doing?
[Amit Varma]: And similarly, the impression many people have about literature as it is taught in academia
[Amit Varma]: and elsewhere, a lot of it seeps into criticism as well, is that there is, you know, a writer
[Amit Varma]: writes a novel or whatever, whatever she writes, with a totally different intent and purpose
[Amit Varma]: in mind. And to kind of look at it, like you would look at a blood sample, and to, you
[Amit Varma]: know, look at it through the prism of this literary theory or that literary theory, maybe
[Amit Varma]: evaluate it on the basis of whether it's politics is or is not desirable. You know, I think
[Amit Varma]: that can kind of become a trap. And this is true, I think, in some extent of academics
[Amit Varma]: of many other fields also, given that, you know, literary criticism is really and you've,
[Amit Varma]: you know, spoke about different categories of it, which we'll go into. But, you know,
[Amit Varma]: it's something that is taking from both these seas. One is a sea of academia, which is disconnected
[Amit Varma]: from the real world. And I mean it entirely in a pejorative sense. Yes. And and the other
[Amit Varma]: is a sea of life itself from which the work itself comes. Yes. Was this something that
[Amit Varma]: you thought about? What do you think about it now? Was it complicated for you?
[Guest]: Yes, I think about it all the time, even today. But I think it was most productive in my 20s
[Guest]: when I was actually trying to work out a system based on these conflicts. Perhaps a few notes
[Guest]: on what you said. I think the comparison between film studies and filmmaking that your friends
[Guest]: stumbled upon, whether they did or didn't, is not an exact analogy to literary criticism
[Guest]: and writing, because in filmmaking, you study the art of making cinema. In film studies,
[Guest]: you're still using language to analyze cinema. Literary criticism is the only kind of criticism
[Guest]: where you use the same medium as what you are analyzing, language. So it is closer to
[Guest]: the literary work than a film review would be to a film. And also, you know, a BA in
[Guest]: English or English study is a fairly new development in the West from which we've got it in India,
[Guest]: you know, 100, 120 years. Before that, all literary critics were in a sense amateurs.
[Guest]: They wrote for the same pleasure of reading that you and I would have had. And so there's
[Guest]: actually an easy way past the last 100 years into Aristotle or anybody, you know, there's
[Guest]: amazing anthologies available now, ancient Chinese literary criticism, Indian literary
[Guest]: criticism. These are all people who wanted to classify, taxonomize, make all sorts of
[Guest]: arcane, sometimes very bizarre theories. But, you know, Indian aesthetic theory, Rasa theory,
[Guest]: is very, very vivid and absolutely usable even today. So I think the task for the writer
[Guest]: is to go past your, you know, that first frontier, where many of the motivations and play at
[Guest]: work are actually the imperatives of the university system and the perpetuation of a certain kind
[Guest]: of academia, academic careerism, rather than an actual, it's not, to me, a lot of it doesn't
[Guest]: seem motivated by the deepest love of literature of the kind I know from the writers whom I
[Guest]: love the best, whom I meet on a daily or weekly or yearly basis. So that is my gold standard
[Guest]: for literary criticism. I need to see that love, or sometimes you can have literary criticism
[Guest]: of very brilliant and very detached mind, you know, it's often destructive rather than
[Guest]: constructive or analytical rather than creative. But there's a certain kind of erudition in
[Guest]: it that you cannot refuse. So in that sense, I would not close my door to any possibility.
[Guest]: But you know, you have a sixth sense for what seems promising and what is not. And in that
[Guest]: sense, I think a lot of, we are lucky that a lot of writers write brilliant literary
[Guest]: criticism and, you know, somebody like Mario Vargas Llosa or V.S. Pritchett actually write
[Guest]: a paragraph as beautiful in their literary criticism as they would do in their novels.
[Guest]: And for them, it's just, you know, it's actually a free flow of thought across the frontiers
[Guest]: of their mind. And they just move this way and that way. And that I think is really nice.
[Amit Varma]: There's another place where you've spoken about how, quote, the jobbing book reviewer
[Amit Varma]: should take pause before he claims the status of either literary critic or essayist. And
[Amit Varma]: I claim both. And about literary criticism, again, you've spoken of it, how a great bulk
[Amit Varma]: of literary criticism today, quote, shows the rigor of a certain literary critical method
[Amit Varma]: or theory of literature, even if it sometimes thereby recuses itself from the realm of the
[Amit Varma]: lay reader, or just as problematically jettisons questions of ascetic value in favor of social
[Amit Varma]: or political questions, or subsumes literary creation to theoretical superstructures, stop
[Amit Varma]: quote. But later, when you speak about, you know, the highest form of literary criticism,
[Amit Varma]: you write even higher on the scale, therefore, as a book review or work of literary criticism
[Amit Varma]: that aspires to the status of an essay, that is a distinctive combination of objective
[Amit Varma]: and subjective perceptions, written up in an unmistakably individual voice, possessing
[Amit Varma]: and proposing nuances of thought, perception and style that enact the pleasures of thinking,
[Amit Varma]: feeling and reasoning about art, and seeking to recreate the drama of literary engagement
[Amit Varma]: in a language that itself incarnates those qualities that make literature the most elevated
[Amit Varma]: side of that universal human currency and connector language, then a book review can
[Amit Varma]: become all of these things, literary criticism, essay literature, stop code. And when you're
[Amit Varma]: first starting out at that point where you want to think about books and write about
[Amit Varma]: books and all of that, what was sort of your early models like today, today, you can, you
[Amit Varma]: know, articulate it so beautifully, and put it like this.
[Guest]: It sounds much nicer when you read it out. I'm, I'm entirely persuaded by what you've
[Guest]: just read.
[Amit Varma]: You better be persuaded by it because you wrote it. But today, you can write it like
[Amit Varma]: that. And today you have you can, in retrospect, look at all your models, like, you know, Pritchett
[Amit Varma]: and so many others. But when when you're starting out, do you have any models? What is a book
[Guest]: review?
[Guest]: Yeah, you, you actually have very good models, because, and in this way, I'm grateful at
[Guest]: least for the small time I spent in the West, you know, where I don't think I learned a
[Guest]: huge amount from a university degree, but buying the newspapers on the weekends, you
[Guest]: could, you know, at the time, the Guardian had a eight or 12 page book supplement. And
[Guest]: as I've written in this essay, you know, you suddenly found as you didn't, you still don't
[Guest]: in India anywhere, other than in a couple of specialist book review journals, you don't
[Guest]: find that a book review supplement in a newspaper, perhaps there was a Hindu literary review.
[Guest]: And somewhere I found lots of names, which are also the names of novelists all writing
[Guest]: short essays or book reviews in a very sparky style 7-800 words, in a way, it was a bit
[Guest]: like the journalistic equivalent of the term essay or the weekly essay I used to write
[Guest]: as a student. And I thought, this is a very nice jump to make a lateral, you know how
[Guest]: they talk about lateral entry into the civil services, a lateral entry into literary criticism.
[Guest]: And this to me, you know, and also, this is where I feel so disappointed sometimes when
[Guest]: newspapers, a newspaper is the perfect place to write about books, there's no better place
[Guest]: anywhere. Even a book is not such a good place to meet a book as a newspaper is in some strange
[Guest]: way, because a newspaper can enact a fellowship of books, you know, if a six page book review
[Guest]: section can have all sorts of books about, you know, imagine India, if you could set
[Guest]: one up and get everyone to write with integrity, another problem of its own kind, you know,
[Guest]: you'd have the newest ideas, what you have in a verbal realm with the seen and unseen,
[Guest]: you know, in a literary realm, you would have people parsing ideas about politics, society,
[Guest]: culture, history, you know, a very deep exploration of a small subject, a very broad exploration
[Guest]: of a large subject, all these things next to each other. And if you, as I did, you know,
[Guest]: read it week after week, after a year to suddenly realize, you know, your mind is much more
[Guest]: flexible, you can run up and down the channels of thought and you also have an opinion to
[Guest]: contribute. You know, that is the main problem that young students, you know, I hope there
[Guest]: will be some young, you know, this is that young students in literature, this is the
[Guest]: problem they feel, the anxiety of those who appear to know what they're saying, the pressure
[Guest]: from those voices is so great that you say, how can I ever hope to match my own? I don't
[Guest]: have an opinion. My opinion is just a combination of other people's opinions linked up in some
[Guest]: very, you know, in a way that I think will please the person who's correcting my exam
[Guest]: paper. That is the usual term essay or exam paper in a BA. But once you go past that and
[Guest]: when you see all these voices, I think I suddenly want, I had this goal, I want to see myself
[Guest]: on those pages. I don't want anything else right now. I want, you know, like somebody
[Guest]: turning the page to like the fellowship of those writers to be on the same page as them.
[Guest]: And that was my only limited goal of my 20s. I want to be on the book review pages of the
[Guest]: good newspapers of the world and to earn my spurs that someone doesn't know me can read
[Guest]: a paragraph or two and say, okay, whether or not this chap will ever be a writer, he
[Guest]: knows, there's that love of literature that comes through. And obviously, as I said, the
[Guest]: middle stage was also a great practicing ground for that, because I could double triple my
[Guest]: audience and actually have a space where people would come to read just my book reviews, not
[Guest]: just a book review where they would find me.
[Amit Varma]: And there's a role for serendipity there. Because I think of the role of serendipity
[Amit Varma]: in my life. Obviously, you and I are sitting across the table because serendipity brought
[Amit Varma]: us together in a way, right? Otherwise, we may have vaguely known of each other and never
[Amit Varma]: actually been friends. And, you know, you speak of the serendipity in your life where,
[Amit Varma]: you know, 2002, you're a lit student in Cambridge, and you're about to eventually come back home
[Amit Varma]: to do whatever and you're terrified of what life in India will be like. And then you come
[Amit Varma]: across this interesting was it classified? Or was it an ad or
[Amit Varma]: it was an ad on the student notice board? Yeah. So tell me a bit about that. You know,
[Guest]: at some point, you're so desperate in life. And in that sense, I agree that a literary
[Guest]: humanities education doesn't prepare you for the sudden brutality and cruelty of life in
[Guest]: the outside world. But even so, I think finding your feet, I look back on those years actually
[Guest]: as with some degree of affection and pride, because it was interesting to work out, you
[Guest]: know, like I say, at some point, you have to work out how to become a small entrepreneur
[Guest]: in literature, right? A few book reviews a month somewhere the other patch together living
[Guest]: try to become a writer on your own. In the meantime, meet your friends and not not such
[Guest]: a bad way to live on balance. A bit hard in Bombay sometimes money but and yeah, so little
[Guest]: bits of good luck. And I was already writing a few book reviews. But when I saw this notice
[Guest]: and those hard cash being promised right there, I kind of felt this is for now this is my
[Guest]: way. It was an ad asking for book reviews. There's a hundred pound payment for reviews
[Guest]: are accepted. And like I said, I never found out where they got published in the earliest
[Guest]: the internet. This is also possible that you know, many newspapers didn't have what was
[Guest]: very strange. You had to write two versions of the same review. Again, great practice
[Guest]: for writing, editing, cutting, revising. And one was 3000 words and one was 1000 words.
[Guest]: You know, 3000 word review is today's unheard of. But sitting down and writing these enormous
[Guest]: pieces actually knows great discipline at the time. And most importantly, it was something
[Guest]: that I was doing. You know, your motives always a combination of wanting to do the work and
[Guest]: the financial. Both are very important. But to make money from doing what you at the time,
[Guest]: I don't think I was capable of much else except perhaps a touch of cricket journalism, which
[Guest]: I also then took up. But staying on his home ground and making money from literature was
[Guest]: a very thrilling experience, small amounts though they were. And I think I kept that
[Guest]: up for a long time. And what was the best thing was, which I still love about book reviewing
[Guest]: that you have, it's like meeting a person every week, a new person, usually at their
[Guest]: best. You know, if you think of how long it takes to write a book, usually every writer
[Guest]: would say a book is who I am, but at the best level that I am not just random, not just
[Guest]: sentences like mine where, you know, pause, run off in some direction. It's all polished,
[Guest]: well written, well thought, revised. And to live at that level of language week by week
[Guest]: is a very good education. And it's a good way to live as well. You know, you realize
[Guest]: words have to be taken seriously. Those people who do have a certain kind of wealth and riches,
[Guest]: once you live at that level, you set yourself higher standards and you meet different kinds
[Guest]: of styles. You know, you realize some writers write a hundred word sentence one after the
[Guest]: other. Some others are very staccato style. And in making notes to somebody recently asked
[Guest]: me at literary festival, you know, give me two tips. I also want to write book reviews,
[Guest]: but I'm struggling to do it. Give me a tip for how to how to write one. I said, you know,
[Guest]: I can't. There's not a formula. But if you are struggling to write one, do something,
[Guest]: make notes as you read of all the sentences that you like. And then before you start to
[Guest]: write, look at the back of your book where you've scrawled all the sentences, pick one
[Guest]: out, copy it out. That is the opening line of a book review. The very fact that has struck
[Guest]: you as essential or interesting shows that there's something in there, whether stylistically
[Guest]: or content wise, that gets to the center of the book, then start to explain. Don't say
[Guest]: now I'm going to explain why I chose the sentence, but actually start doing that. You know, saying
[Guest]: in so-and-so's book, these words show that something is happening, etc. And you go on
[Guest]: from there. And from then on, you'll find the words flowing, just run down the line.
[Guest]: You know, the biggest problem that the blank page is solved. Use the writer to solve your
[Guest]: problem and then add something to the writer's voice. But there are all these little things
[Guest]: that you find out. And like I said, you know, there's something. Another reason why this
[Guest]: romantic feeling towards book reviewing is that for lots of people who do it with real
[Guest]: passion, in a way, you're pouring the best of your writing into praising or occasionally
[Guest]: cutting down or criticizing somebody else's writing. And I say at some point, you know,
[Guest]: there can be many definitions, but one of them is basically a writer who uses his or
[Guest]: her best sentences in the service of somebody else's book. And I think there's something
[Guest]: generous in that. Even now, when I find my book reviewed by somebody where there's an
[Guest]: actual passion or a real engagement involved, I really feel very grateful and all writers
[Guest]: feel grateful for that level of engagement. Even if perhaps the reviewer says the book
[Guest]: was a bit disappointing. You'll take that over a flat good review any day, I think.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, we're actually recording this on April 12. So this will, this episode might even
[Amit Varma]: come out in June, because I'm banked so much in advance. But the episode I released yesterday
[Amit Varma]: was with someone I realize now is a good friend of yours, Shruti Kapila. Yes. And I was just
[Amit Varma]: thinking of like the one sentence from her book, which really stood out for me. Yes.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't know if she would accept that it is central to her book or whatever, but
[Amit Varma]: it stood out for me was, quote, Hindutva is a theory of violence in search of its history.
[Guest]: Tremendous. Tremendous. That's a tremendous, tremendous. Yeah. Yeah, this is a it's a very
[Guest]: good line. Very good line to pick up. And you realize even in prose works of great depth,
[Guest]: detail and density, you make little leaps from single sentence springs. Yeah, such as
[Guest]: this one. And then you can expand and broaden and articulate your theory. But you still
[Guest]: in that sense, literature is so, so sly and artful in the way it works. The deepest things
[Guest]: happen in two or three seconds. And then again, you go on that slow, slow path. And there's
[Amit Varma]: another beautiful passage I'll read out and is resonant with me for different reasons
[Amit Varma]: this passage and one reason is resonant with me is that so many of us today take the internet
[Amit Varma]: for granted, even computers for granted. Early in your essay, you talk about how you were
[Unknown]: so happy to have a refurbished laptop, as it were, where you could sit in your room
[Amit Varma]: and have to write and even I remember my, you know, in the late 90s, how desperately
[Amit Varma]: I wanted a computer of my own and what a big deal it was. And yes, we take it all for granted.
[Amit Varma]: But speaking of the internet, I'll just read this passage out where once you started reviewing
[Amit Varma]: and you were at Cambridge, you write quote, I found I love to browse the archives of the
[Amit Varma]: book review pages of the New York Times by typing in the names of writers who had floated
[Amit Varma]: into my consciousness, Tolstoy, Henry Green, Constantine Cavafy, Gabriel Mistral, and reading
[Amit Varma]: everything that had been published about them over the decades. And then everything I could
[Amit Varma]: find by the writers who had written something interesting about one of them. Everything
[Amit Varma]: was something in itself and a link to something else, stop quote. And I find this delightful
[Amit Varma]: because it's like there is this sea of knowledge and associations out there. And then by choosing
[Amit Varma]: to write, you are jumping into that sea yourself. Yes, yes, you know. So how much of your reviewing
[Amit Varma]: craft as it were, like I would imagine that someone learning to review say, in 1992, as
[Amit Varma]: opposed to 2002, would become completely different. Because in 1992, your references would be
[Amit Varma]: so limited. Yes, your sense of what is possible, what is permissible, would be so small. But
[Amit Varma]: over here, suddenly everything is open to you. So how did how did you approach it? Who
[Amit Varma]: were sort of your models? Were there? Did you have an ethic of writing book reviews
[Amit Varma]: that these are the things I will do? And these are the things I won't do? Just in terms of
[Guest]: approach? How did you sort of? Well, my initial models were all entirely Western only because
[Guest]: there was a space in in in Western literary culture for this sort of work to happen much
[Guest]: more so than in India. Bizarrely enough, once I came back to India and started work here,
[Guest]: obviously, I found many very good Indian literary critics who had or reviewers who had till
[Guest]: then had somehow, you know, if your parents bought one newspaper, and you lived in Bombay,
[Guest]: you would never end up knowing these names. At the time, there wasn't that connection.
[Guest]: You know, Arshia Sattar, Niranjana Roy, Shama Futehali, Meenakshi Mukherjee, all the range
[Guest]: of first rate literary writers, whom I came to later. But at the time, it was mainly you
[Guest]: know, the good newspapers of the world, the Washington Post, where I published my first
[Guest]: proper book review. And when that check came, I'll never forget the moment. And it was only
[Guest]: because of your laptop that you could even in England, it was hard to get an American
[Guest]: newspaper, but you could. So in that sense, yes, for people of our generation, there's
[Guest]: two loves you can never forget the first girl you fell in love with, and the first laptop
[Guest]: you ever. I still have it, I can't bear to give it away. I mean, it's in some old cupboard
[Guest]: of mine. And that sense of freedom also comes from, you know, in that sense, it's good to
[Guest]: have a what is called a naive youth, because when you start suddenly climbing up the mountain
[Guest]: of literature, it is so exciting that you can't even bear to sleep, because next morning,
[Guest]: get up and start the climb again. And there's always a new challenge in front of you. And
[Guest]: every day, your language improves, your vocabulary improves, your sense of detail improves. So
[Guest]: you can like with everything else, you know, repetition is the mother of skill, and you
[Guest]: get better by you. I think I used to make in my 20s, I used to be so upset by reading
[Guest]: a bad book, including a bad book by a good writer, and every writer has a right to write
[Guest]: a few bad books, you know, it's not possible always to keep up even quality, I get so upset
[Guest]: at having wasted three or four days that I would write a very sarcastic, a cutting review,
[Guest]: sometimes I would not want to do that anymore. But equally, I think it was, you know, one
[Guest]: should not lose that pugilistic sense of saying, you know, this is not worth someone's time,
[Guest]: and I'll detail in a hundred with 100 reasons why it's not. So there's some reviews like
[Guest]: that in my book as well, I cut a few others out thinking I don't want to keep these animaties
[Guest]: left by consecrating them into print. Because it is upsetting as a writer, you know, to
[Guest]: have somebody say bad things about your book, but it has to be done sometimes. And everyone
[Guest]: should also have this experience just so that you know what it's like on each side. So after
[Guest]: that, you know, it's all determined, like the book is the ultimate improvisational art.
[Guest]: Somebody says 800 words, somebody says 400 words, somebody says 1200 words, what points
[Guest]: you will pick up what argument to make all depends on what day of the week it is, how
[Guest]: much time you had to think about it. But over the years, you know, I was for a while I was
[Guest]: the weekly book critic of lounge, I used to write 50 6070 I think 2007 or 70 book reviews
[Guest]: a year. It was like a mini factory for every four days, send one out, the next one comes
[Guest]: in at the same time updating my blog. No wonder it took me so long to write my first novel.
[Guest]: But it was very exciting morning till night, the life in literature, this way or that way
[Guest]: somebody else's book, your book, somebody else's book reviews, your book reviews, little
[Guest]: bits of talk and drinking at your place in the middle. Just to make sure one actually
[Guest]: saw a human face. But otherwise, it was just the face of a page for so long.
[Amit Varma]: Before we get back to the biographical part of it, which I do want to, you know, go down
[Amit Varma]: step by step. But before that, a couple of questions. Now, I'll read out another passage
[Amit Varma]: from your book where at one point you write, a book is only one text, but it is many books.
[Amit Varma]: It is a different book for each of his readers. My Anna Karenina is not your Anna Karenina.
[Amit Varma]: Your Arzi the Dwarf is not the Arzi the Dwarf that I wrote. When we think of a favorite
[Amit Varma]: book, we recall not only the shape of the story, the characters who touched our hearts,
[Amit Varma]: the texture of the sentences, we recall our own circumstances when we read it, where we
[Amit Varma]: bought it and for how much what kind of joy or solace it provided, how scenes from the
[Amit Varma]: text began to intermingle with scenes from our life, how it roused us to anger or indignation,
[Amit Varma]: allowed us to make our peace with some great discord. This is the second life of the book.
[Amit Varma]: It's life is our life, stop quote. And therefore, you could argue that there are as many, each
[Amit Varma]: book has as many versions as there are readers. Now, is this an impediment or an opportunity
[Amit Varma]: for someone who is reviewing a book? Because on the one hand, it may feel like an impediment
[Amit Varma]: because the only notion of the book that you can possibly capture is defined by your limitations
[Amit Varma]: in your life. But on the other hand, it can be an opportunity because you can make your
[Amit Varma]: reading of the book that much richer by pouring the personal into it as well. This is something
[Unknown]: I discussed with our mutual friend Jaya Arjun Singh when we did an episode on film criticism.
[Amit Varma]: Like one of the things that I really liked about his film blogging was that once he found
[Unknown]: his voice, it was imbued with the personal. It was not just about a cinema, but what he
[Amit Varma]: feels about that, what it makes him feel and all of that, which I think made the whole
[Amit Varma]: experience richer. So we can approach this both as a feature or a bug. But is this something
[Guest]: you've thought about? Yes, yes, yes, because it ends up being endlessly
[Guest]: discussed in literature. And also, you know, it raises a very banal sense. You know, you
[Guest]: could say if all readings are subjective, every reader has his own version of a book.
[Guest]: What is the difference between a book review and Amazon reviews of three or four lines
[Guest]: or whatever, a starred review or whatever? So my way of breaking this question down is
[Guest]: that, you know, of course, everyone's opinion is somewhat subjective and you can bring many
[Guest]: kinds of readings to a book, some of them necessarily the result of your own past or
[Guest]: what you can see in a book. Even so, a very deep subjectivity is a kind of objectivity,
[Guest]: in my view. Somebody who really wrestles with the book can pick out all sorts of things
[Guest]: from it. And, you know, just because you bring yourself to the book doesn't mean that your
[Guest]: book is that book is also not released to its greatest self by you. The two can really
[Guest]: meet and both sides are giving something very deeply of themselves. And that is the encounter
[Guest]: that you record. And you don't always have to make it dramatic, therefore saying, you
[Guest]: know, this move me or whatever, just the writing itself will show how much you invested of
[Guest]: your of your heart, your mind, your soul into it. And there are certain technical aspects
[Guest]: of, you know, literary criticism, like no matter, your Anna Karenina can be different
[Guest]: from mine, but you might not be able to say a lot about it other than you liked it or
[Guest]: you like some character. Whereas another kind of reader would could follow the, for instance,
[Guest]: the changing meanings of a certain word, let us say love, in Anna's mind as Tolstoy shows
[Guest]: it across the face of the book and, you know, be able to develop arguments, perhaps not
[Guest]: only about the book itself, but linking that book to the general ideas of love in Russian
[Guest]: culture in world literature. So there's infinite pathways you can create. And the more you
[Guest]: read, the more adept you become at making links. That's why in the later sections of
[Guest]: my book, I begin to write essays about two writers and three writers, not just one writer
[Guest]: showing how you can raise your game up. So sometimes some comparisons become very fruitful,
[Guest]: you know, a Russian writer with an Oriya novelist, they would have never met each other. But
[Guest]: if there's a similar note in their work, how what is the differences in the way they approach
[Guest]: it? And are they both? Can the reading of both be improved by being set in conversation
[Guest]: with one another as it were? You know, Jugalbandi is a very classic feature of Indian art. And
[Guest]: I really appreciate, you know, that we have such a deep artistic tradition that can be
[Guest]: applied to literary criticism as well. Bring people together and see what they say. And
[Guest]: the comparisons reveal things about each other that a single analysis won't. And in that
[Guest]: sense, I really believe, you know, there are better readings. Every reader has his own
[Guest]: book, a version of the book, but there are better readers and there are less good readers.
[Guest]: And there's nothing to feel ashamed of. There are many readers I meet on a daily basis who
[Guest]: I know are superior readers to me. That doesn't mean that, you know, like, I still rate myself
[Guest]: as a reader and a writer. But I know there's some things they can do that I can't do. I
[Guest]: would like at some point to slowly move upwards till perhaps at the age of 80, I'll write
[Guest]: the perfect essay. And then one can head off to the next library wherever that is.
[Amit Varma]: Let's take a digression on reading then. And the question that is how does one read a book?
[Amit Varma]: And the most primal way of reading a book is you read it for the story. This happened,
[Amit Varma]: that happened next, and you're kind of just reading it like that. And later on, you begin
[Amit Varma]: to find other ways of reading a book. And some of it, of course, is enhanced by the
[Amit Varma]: criticism that you read. For example, I remember reading Madame Bovary as a child, and then
[Amit Varma]: coming across, you know, James Woods, excellent essay on it, where he speaks about the book
[Amit Varma]: and speaks about the use of the free indirect voice. And then reading Madame Bovary again.
[Amit Varma]: And it's like an education. It's like, everything has been stripped away, you understand so
[Amit Varma]: much not just about a particular book, but about craft and language and everything. And
[Amit Varma]: it's, yes, you know, and that kind of happens. So now, you know, when and this is something
[Amit Varma]: my writing students also asked me sometimes that, how should I read? And now one aspect
[Amit Varma]: of reading is, of course, intentionality, where you can perhaps say something concrete
[Amit Varma]: and read it in this way. But the other aspect is that how you read is also a function of
[Amit Varma]: how much you have read before. Yeah. And how much of that you're bringing into something
[Amit Varma]: that you have read. So, you know, do you have any thoughts on this, especially because in
[Amit Varma]: a sense, every reviewer, or literary essayist like yourself must carry two readers. And
[Amit Varma]: one reader, I suppose, is someone who is just reading a book for the enjoyment, yes, with
[Amit Varma]: any other thoughts being pure asides. But another mode of reading that you of course
[Amit Varma]: do is where you're thinking deeper, where you're making all of these connections where
[Amit Varma]: you're reading Proust, and you're saying, Ah, Love's God did this here, and so and so
[Amit Varma]: on. And you're making those connections and that. So is it so that there are those two
[Amit Varma]: modes of reading with some kind of continuing between them for you? And if you had to advise
[Amit Varma]: people on how to read, you know, what would you what would you say?
[Guest]: Well, there may have been two modes at a certain point of time when you're starting out for
[Guest]: me now, they're just one mode. I don't read everything. Yeah. You know, on the internet,
[Guest]: you know, when you're reading pieces that have deliberately not been written to do anything
[Guest]: other than instruct or explain something, you don't need to attach that deeper, though
[Guest]: even their style is very important, I find. But otherwise, when you're reading something
[Guest]: that has been set up as a kind of machine, one can use other words, but a kind of machine
[Guest]: for releasing verbal pleasure. You know, you have to look at the controls and the writer
[Guest]: is himself or herself given some cues with punctuation, structure, all these things that
[Guest]: you have to unpack and relive the book inside your head. And for that, you know, you have
[Guest]: to give your best self to it. And when the book is good, you must be good. I mean, don't
[Guest]: distract yourself with other stuff. Keep your phone away, read 10-15 pages at a time, not
[Guest]: a few sentences here or there. Give a certain hour of the day to reading, preferably the
[Guest]: first hour of the day, if you can manage it and you're not rushed to go somewhere. These
[Guest]: would be my advices for young readers or writers. Give the best of yourself to a book because
[Guest]: the very definition of a book is somebody giving the best of themselves. So if both
[Guest]: we approach the situation in the same spirit, that's when you can unlock whatever, you know,
[Guest]: just as in life, you are, as a body, you are what you eat, as a reader, you are what you
[Guest]: read and you have to learn to read well. But of course, it's frustrating at the beginning
[Guest]: because it's such a long tradition to absorb. So I would say, if you want to be a novelist,
[Guest]: you must read 15 novels naively, perhaps not picking up everything about them before the
[Guest]: path becomes easier, but that much time you must struggle. So it's helpful to read a novel
[Guest]: every week, get it out the way in a year or two, and then start to slow down and pay attention.
[Guest]: Read the great Indian canon. In a way, my book is also a little snapshot of all the
[Guest]: things that could be. Everyone's canon will be different because we are such a big country.
[Guest]: But at the very least, we must read Indian books, books in translation, books from every
[Guest]: other continent. It's possible to do that now. Why limit yourself? Put it all together
[Amit Varma]: in your own map.
[Amit Varma]: And you speak of reading the great Indian books and the great Indian canon and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And I had another question about this, because your training in literature, in whether you
[Amit Varma]: did your BA in Xavier's and then you went to Cambridge and whatever, would have been
[Amit Varma]: kind of from a Western perspective. And this brings across a problem, like in one of your
[Amit Varma]: essays, you've quoted Fakim Mohan Senapati's book, Six Seekers and a Third. And you've
[Amit Varma]: written there, ask a new babu his grandfather's father's name and he will hem and haw, the
[Amit Varma]: narrator chirps, but the names of the ancestors of England, Charles III will readily roll
[Amit Varma]: off his tongue, which is kind of true. And later you quote Boyd Tonkin, where Tonkin
[Amit Varma]: in an essay on Nage Mefousa's Cairo Trilogy, at one point talks about how the books, quote,
[Amit Varma]: enact a dialogue between Egyptian ways of seeing and European ways of knowing, which
[Amit Varma]: struck me as really interesting phrases. So deep, yes. And then in another essay, you
[Amit Varma]: refer to how, you know, Ramanujan's famous essay of 1990, which was titled, Is there
[Amit Varma]: an Indian way of thinking? And you spoke about how, quote, and these are your words, in the
[Amit Varma]: closing years of the 19th century, the Oriya writer Fakim Mohan Senapati appears to have
[Amit Varma]: asked himself that question in another form. Is there an Indian way of writing a novel?
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote. This gets me to thinking about what happens when you bring a prism of looking
[Amit Varma]: at literature that is a Western prism, shaped by Western literature with its values and
[Unknown]: mores and all of that. And you bring it and you're looking at Indian literature like that.
[Amit Varma]: And is it even fair? Like I did a wonderful episode with Sarah Rai, Munshi Premchand's
[Amit Varma]: granddaughter and a really fine writer herself. And I asked this in the context of Premchand
[Amit Varma]: because one, there is no denying that Premchand is a heck of a writer. But there's also no
[Amit Varma]: denying that if you look at his work through a Western prism, it'll be very easy to pick
[Amit Varma]: flaws with it. But are they really flaws? Or is it the prism that we are looking through?
[Amit Varma]: So since you seem to sort of combine the art of literary criticism with also this deep
[Amit Varma]: abiding affection for Indian books or books by Indian authors in the different languages,
[Guest]: what are your thoughts on this?
[Guest]: You know, the very fact that I'm so touched to see that you pulled out three different
[Guest]: points and very far distant points of my book to make, piece together one question itself
[Guest]: showing that this is the sort of reading for which I have the highest regard. Even if it's
[Guest]: the reading of my own book, I'm very happy. You know, it's lovely that a question can
[Guest]: be enunciated in these kinds of detail. And yes, I think that is the problem or the interesting
[Guest]: question, the puzzle, as there should be puzzles in writing, the puzzle for the Indian novelist
[Guest]: today. How do you write Indian novels in English? Many people have answered that before me.
[Guest]: And what sort of inheritance you bring to bear? I'm going to read one. It's, although
[Guest]: it looks, you know, like this example of Premchand, a lot of early Indian novels are very derivative
[Guest]: of Western forms because there's that pressure of imitation of their authority saying this
[Guest]: is how it should be done. You do it, just change the names of the characters and the
[Guest]: situations. But it's got to be written with that in the didactic style. A little passage
[Guest]: from my country's literature. The novel, Literary History Tells Us, had its beginnings in the
[Guest]: birth of modernity in the West. In societies like India and Egypt, Brazil and Korea, it
[Guest]: was a transplant. But wherever the novel went, it merged with that world's indigenous storytelling
[Guest]: traditions and reappeared with a new face and form, a new way of being. It was the literary
[Guest]: version of the traveller who makes himself at home anywhere he or she goes. And this,
[Guest]: I think, is the wonderful thing about novels, you know, that and this is what Boyd Duncan
[Guest]: is also in that wonderful book of his finally arriving at. So using the Western, the classic
[Guest]: Western form of the novel in writing novels about your own society is an intermediate
[Guest]: stage, a necessary intermediate stage in any novel's journey into a culture. And slowly,
[Guest]: slowly those paraphernalia begin to fall away. The scaffolding begins to fall away. And inside
[Guest]: a new work of building is going on. And obviously, some geniuses arrived at those answers much
[Guest]: earlier than the others. So, you know, that's why I think Indian literature is always being
[Guest]: renewed even by the past, not just by the future. Because in translation, new books
[Guest]: come into view that have been lost for so long. Srinapati's novel, only in 2006, when
[Guest]: I read it when I was 26, I suddenly realized this could be another way of working. Not
[Guest]: now, perhaps in the future. But the novel is told not in the first person or in the
[Guest]: third person, but in the first person plural, we. The voice speaking, the narrator seems
[Guest]: like a plural voice, which is very rarely seen something like that, which so successfully
[Guest]: brought off that you realize this almost like the voice of the voice of the village chorus
[Guest]: or the panchayat kind of speaking. And he just doesn't say it. But that's what you understand.
[Guest]: Novels have to have lots of secrets in them. And in that sense, I think the novel, you
[Guest]: know, in the last 30, 40 years, when you put together all the Indian, the different novels
[Guest]: from all the languages in India, each of which has a kind of slightly separate or different
[Guest]: novelistic pathway and tradition, you realize that we are actually the center of the of
[Guest]: the novel in the world. We ourselves perhaps don't know it. And we can't also find all
[Guest]: the novels in other languages. But from above, if one were to be the novel as a concept suddenly
[Guest]: embodied in a bird or, you know, a cloud and looking from above, drifting over the world,
[Guest]: it's top of India and say, I want to stay here. This is where the most interesting stuff
[Guest]: is going on. And then, you know, you realize also every novel must have generational, you
[Guest]: know, people speak in different ways from generation to generation. Even the Bambaiya
[Guest]: of today, I don't think when we were growing up, people used to say the word chapter for
[Guest]: a particular kind of eccentric character. That's the way they say now. It's always renewing
[Guest]: itself. Language is always renewing itself in living speech. And since the novelist's
[Guest]: work is to record living speech, even perhaps not necessarily through a direct direct transposition,
[Guest]: you know, if I were to write Bambaiya Hindi in my English novels, it would look odd, a
[Guest]: patchwork. But I can find an English to sort of replicate those rhythms, or I can find
[Guest]: other strategies, there are many. And in a way, the novel is like life in that there's
[Guest]: no formulas at all. For every book you have to, just like with life, you have to invent
[Guest]: your solutions for that piece of material. And after a while, you learn to trust yourself
[Guest]: and let go of the precedents and say it doesn't matter. And sometimes you may make things
[Guest]: confusing to your readers, because in the end, you know, there's this basic tension
[Guest]: between novels and capitalism, they are sold in a capitalistic world. But capitalism prizes
[Guest]: reliability, repeatability, what is promised is what is delivered, the classic things that
[Guest]: good brands do well. The very raison d'etre of novels is to always surprise you and to
[Guest]: sell you short and take you somewhere else. Even if it means having all these quotes on
[Guest]: the top, you know, this is a cross between Paulo Coelho and Dan Brown, etc, etc. And
[Guest]: this is where I think the good novels are so wonderful, they, you never know what is
[Guest]: going to happen in the next page, you might know what's going to happen in the story,
[Guest]: the story is revealed to you even in the synopsis. But moment by moment, the situations that
[Guest]: emerge, and as a writer, it is so exciting to write once you are in it, you know, it's
[Guest]: very frustrating till the time you can't get the hang even of your own book. But I think
[Guest]: the greatest highs of my life have been this five, six, seven month periods when I knew
[Guest]: I don't have to work to think what I'm going to write tomorrow. I just sit there, the past
[Guest]: the momentum of the past three, four years will immediately, it's almost like you're
[Guest]: in communion with the secret spirit of the novel. Not that you have some special, you
[Guest]: know, pass or anything like that. It's just that you've done the groundwork, and you've
[Guest]: done the reading. And then for a few months, you will have this amazing dance with an abstract
[Guest]: idea that you see playing itself out inside your own mind. And that I think separate from
[Guest]: reading novels, this is the pleasure of writing them that you feel you cannot get it, perhaps
[Guest]: you can get it a little bit from falling in love with a person, or, or rummaging through
[Guest]: very deep memories. But you can use those for novels as well. So a novel,
[Amit Varma]: deep memories of falling in love, put it in a novel and you've got it all together. Yes.
[Amit Varma]: So I want to ask a question about expectations and conventions and whether we are imprisoned
[Unknown]: by them in the sense that you've written for you write a review for the Washington Post.
[Amit Varma]: And then for the longest time, you came back to India and you were a weekly reviewer for
[Amit Varma]: Mint and we'll talk about that as well, where you were being paid a pittance, which I only
[Amit Varma]: found out while reading your essay. And then you go on to, at the same time, you're writing
[Amit Varma]: reviews for a whole bunch of foreign publications. Now, I would imagine that there, there's a
[Amit Varma]: certain expectation of what a review is, it is not even as much their expectation as just
[Amit Varma]: an understanding that is there, because you have spent all this time reading all the reviews
[Amit Varma]: that come there, reading all the literary essays that are published and saying, Oh,
[Amit Varma]: this is how it is. And this is how I structure it. And these are the kinds of things I write
[Amit Varma]: about and draw connections from. And therefore, in a sense, that is a convention that you've
[Amit Varma]: set for yourself, which you're not necessarily, you don't have to follow any of them on your
[Amit Varma]: blog. But that's a convention when you're writing those reviews. Similarly, when you're
[Amit Varma]: writing a novel, there are conventions of how you kind of go about it. And there'll
[Amit Varma]: be conventions in the West. And you'll find that people in India have done various other
[Amit Varma]: things like this novel with the v narrator, right? Like, I understand that every constraint
[Amit Varma]: is also liberating in the sense that once you know where the parameters are, you just
[Amit Varma]: go for it. And you can do whatever within that within that. But at the same time, do
[Amit Varma]: you then start thinking as the years go by about how I can break out of this convention
[Amit Varma]: like on an in an unrelated field, perhaps I had the journalist I was about to say data
[Amit Varma]: journalist, but I don't want to typecast the journalist Rukmini S here, sitting exactly
[Amit Varma]: where you're sitting and we recorded an episode. And she was complaining about the structure
[Amit Varma]: that's almost become a cliche for data journalism, that you start with a human story. So you
[Unknown]: want to humanize the data, and then you get into the data. And she's like that one, it's
[Amit Varma]: a cliche. And two, it can also be misleading, because you can pick any damn story for any
[Amit Varma]: damn whatever. Yes. So is this something you've thought about over the years, because one
[Amit Varma]: of the sort of perks of being forced to read as widely as you are, is that you are then
[Amit Varma]: also forced to reconsider all these parameters that have been set by others. What are your
[Guest]: thoughts on this? Yes, you know, I've been very lucky that, you know, as soon as my first
[Guest]: book came out, I was able to live a life where sometimes my book walked ahead of me and people
[Guest]: knew me because of my book rather than knowing me as me. Suddenly, my access to novels remain
[Guest]: the same access to novelists went up by like 1000%. Much more than that, even, you know,
[Guest]: suddenly you could speak to somebody as an equal and other people looked at you as an
[Guest]: equal. Once you've written one novel, a good novel, you're a novelist for life. I mean,
[Guest]: you don't need to write and you want to write more, but nobody can take that badge away
[Guest]: from you. And, and in that sense, you know, I had the very exciting thing of sometimes
[Guest]: I'll go in residencies or meet people on a festival or run into them somewhere. And in
[Guest]: two or three hours, you could go over the entire history of novels as you knew it and
[Guest]: as they knew it and compare your ideas. And you could use them as springboards to jump
[Guest]: ahead. For instance, I think till about, till I wrote my first novel, I was still a fairly
[Guest]: traditional novelist. I don't think I then grew as a novelist so much by reading novels
[Guest]: as by talking about novels with other novelists who were so far ahead of me in their understanding
[Guest]: of what to do with story and how to arrange them that those conversations were what I
[Guest]: live for. And in particular, I remember my Israeli writer friend, perhaps my closest
[Guest]: friend in literature even today, Ofi Touche Gafla, who probably one of the most creative
[Guest]: human beings I ever met, you know, the classic model of a writer is, you know, he lives to
[Guest]: write. I had the very good fortune of spending almost three uninterrupted months in his daily
[Guest]: company in a residency. Imagine the end of it, you know, I almost forgot who I was, so
[Guest]: much on the influence of somebody else. But as the years have passed by, I've managed
[Guest]: to, you know, again, return to some of the ideas and we meet every two years anyway,
[Guest]: and catch up and talk again, talk about books. And you can even talk about the same book
[Guest]: that you loved and take different things away from it, you know, high grade conversation
[Guest]: between two people who work in the same form. And about breaking conventions, you know,
[Guest]: in the end, when you take the idea of the novel that I just explained, it should surprise,
[Guest]: it should do something new, to its logical conclusion, every novel should be written
[Guest]: in a way that no other novel can be. But you know, that is not possible. That would be
[Guest]: also an absurd world where the reader would have to learn the ropes every time. Imagine
[Guest]: putting that pressure on readers. So it's got to be some mix of sticking to the form
[Guest]: and making little nicks and cuts or changes so that you show that you're also criticizing
[Guest]: the form that did the way it was. You know, innovations don't have to happen on a major
[Guest]: structural scale. They can really happen, you know, I know this friend of mine, Saskia
[Guest]: Jain, who in writing dialogue, often end sentences with the word HHM. And the first time I thought
[Guest]: that this is such a natural way of putting pauses and sounds into speech, which it has
[Guest]: never occurred to me, although you hear it all the time. Novelists give you new eyes
[Guest]: for how the world really works. And in big and small ways. And I think in the end, the
[Guest]: small ways of noticing are perhaps the more valuable, because the big ways, you know,
[Guest]: the sociologists, the political scientists also keep on bringing to you that level of
[Guest]: knowledge creation is happening. The way in which life changes through some small detail,
[Guest]: you begin to think a new word enters the culture from somewhere, and the use of that word slowly
[Guest]: transforms an entire society. Those are the things that novels, you know, are very good
[Guest]: at doing the flow of an idea or a person through time, and the analysis of time itself. And
[Guest]: in that way, you know, novels can never run out of, you know, because even our sense of
[Guest]: what time means has changed so much in the last 20 years, I find myself unable to keep
[Guest]: up with the idea of how I still perhaps I cannot analyze what has happened in the last
[Guest]: 20 years in a novel, at the level of experience of digital time, and what it means to, you
[Guest]: know, keep on flipping between an Instagram post or Facebook, then a sentence here. I'm
[Guest]: perhaps not even interested in that. To me, since we are older, it's not as interesting
[Guest]: as it might be to someone younger. But so I think what finally, one must remember that
[Guest]: one is trying to break conventions, but the whole point of writing novels is not to break
[Guest]: conventions still to tell interesting stories. But you realize that since conventions can
[Guest]: also be an impediment in telling a story, interestingly, you use them and sometimes
[Guest]: you move them out of the way and you create your own rules for the book, perhaps you abandon
[Guest]: it right after the book. And that actually respects the reader because you are saying
[Guest]: to the reader, I don't completely agree with the inheritance. Here is my slight adaptation
[Guest]: of life, writing everything. And that is why you should read this book.
[Amit Varma]: A couple of questions. And one again goes back to the ways in which we have changed
[Amit Varma]: and I have changed is that often when we are young, the way we behave implicitly, we kind
[Amit Varma]: of see ourselves as, you know, the central character of a play and everyone else is either
[Amit Varma]: just a character or a prop, right? They're just props. And you see this on social media
[Amit Varma]: all the time where people are all the time, you know, trying to raise their status by
[Amit Varma]: attacking others by snarking on others, so on and so forth. Little realizing that there
[Amit Varma]: are real people at the end of that. And when people kind of do it to politicians and all
[Amit Varma]: of that, I understand because, you know, our taxes are going and they're supposed to govern
[Amit Varma]: as well. And all of that, you want to hold them accountable. But I'll see random person
[Amit Varma]: attacking random other person with quote tweets and all of that. And I'm thinking that it's
[Amit Varma]: not it's not necessary just because you disagree with someone to attack them personally. And
[Amit Varma]: I think I've been guilty of that myself that even back in the old blogging days, and I
[Amit Varma]: would of course in my India Uncut days do like five posts a day and did 8000 posts in
[Amit Varma]: those five years. And I remember that I would just give any comment on anybody and not give
[Amit Varma]: a shit because it's like I am at the center of the universe and I'm passing judgment on
[Amit Varma]: people and all of that. And unfortunately, I think I did this to you also where once
[Amit Varma]: you had, you had written a review, I felt really bad about it later. You had you had
[Amit Varma]: written a review, I think of Patrick French's book on Naipaul, right?
[Amit Varma]: Yes, yes. Apples and oranges. Remember that now? Yeah. And I felt that you were judging
[Amit Varma]: it on the basis of what you wanted it to be rather than what it was, which was what I
[Amit Varma]: think Martin Amis had a quote about that, if I remember correctly, or somebody had a
[Amit Varma]: quote about that. So I put that quote out there. And I put a link to your this thing.
[Amit Varma]: And later, I realized that what a dick thing that was for me to do. Right? Like, firstly,
[Amit Varma]: it's a dick thing for to do to anybody. And to do a dick thing to one of your closest
[Amit Varma]: friends. So absurd. So no, I'm just putting it out there because it's something that struck
[Amit Varma]: with me of, you know, there are many little things that one regrets. And I remember that.
[Amit Varma]: And the question that I'm going to ask you is, that is that something as a young reviewer?
[Amit Varma]: Were you at any point also guilty of ignoring that in retrospect? Because while you were
[Amit Varma]: writing about books for you, you were diving into this great sea of knowledge and literature,
[Amit Varma]: and you're contributing to the discourse. But sometimes your words can be hurtful to
[Amit Varma]: an actual real human being. They're not characters or props. Famously, if I remember correctly,
[Amit Varma]: forgive me if I'm wrong. I believe Kiran Nagarkar actually fell physically ill after a review
[Guest]: you wrote of one of his books.
[Guest]: Oh, don't say that. Did this really happen? I'm sure it's one of those apocryphal...
[Amit Varma]: I think you only told me.
[Amit Varma]: No, no.
[Amit Varma]: Somebody told me that you savaged one of his books in a review. And he apparently was so
[Amit Varma]: depressed by it, and he actually fell ill. He died many years later. So you're in Kiran
[Amit Varma]: Nagarkar's books.
[Guest]: This is in the realm of black humor. This is a new genre of literary black humor.
[Amit Varma]: This becomes especially more pertinent when you become a lit festival regular, and actually
[Guest]: meeting all of these people all the time.
[Guest]: Well, I mean, there's so many things to say on a human and literary level about these
[Guest]: things. Of course, you know, first of all, I mean, between you and me, I think we always
[Guest]: we, as I said, I enjoyed the disagreements. And I do remember now you bring it up checking
[Guest]: the blog comment section every two hours to see whether you'd reply. Then I would have
[Guest]: to also jump in once more. And so it was like a long day. But I think between us, we always
[Guest]: knew our disagreements and good faith and, you know, like and upsetting each other is
[Guest]: part of the game a little bit to also, you know, what it brings out something in each
[Guest]: other. And it's, I mean, it's a very masculine thing to do. And, you know, it's a bit of,
[Guest]: you know, we can enjoy that episode as something that, you know, as part of our journey. And
[Guest]: and it was a substantive point. As I remember now, I went into my library, pulled out five
[Guest]: other literary biographies and started quoting from this and that. So, you know, it made
[Guest]: me work harder. With literary criticism, you know, in the end, I think writers must realize
[Guest]: that, you know, it's very easy to get a review wrong. And of course, you know, many reviews
[Guest]: also badly written. And sometimes they also written, you know, with people know each other.
[Guest]: So it's an imperfect and impure form filled with lots of human motivations and errors
[Guest]: that don't have to do with literature. And you can end up mistaking one for the other
[Guest]: and thinking, you know, this person didn't like my book, which doesn't like me, etc,
[Guest]: etc. What can one do, you know, and one is in the social world where you end up much
[Guest]: more now than 15 years ago, where you end up meeting folk. People should have a discipline
[Guest]: to leave it at that and move on, both on the receiving side and the giving side. And I
[Guest]: know it can be hard, but I think, you know, there's so many things are harder as a writer
[Guest]: before I get stuck here. I really think I mean, when I meet some people who've written
[Guest]: something negative about my books, I try not to bring it up ever or to even let it affect,
[Guest]: perhaps subconsciously still it does. But I think one could have a perfectly pleasant
[Guest]: relationship with if one were not to be able to do this, basically, it means that a bad
[Guest]: review is war for the rest of your life. I mean, there's no way to live. Even literature
[Guest]: says that what is the point of living like this, if writing about books were to lead
[Guest]: to this, this problem, you are left with a culture of empty praise, which also sadly,
[Guest]: I think we have far too much the business of blurbs, etc, etc. So, for all the problems,
[Guest]: and the people one may have hurt and the fact that one doesn't realize there's an actual
[Guest]: person, although, you know, people are hurt on a daily basis, but so much else, you know,
[Guest]: why should a reviewer be singled out as being especially, you know, come on, to be honest,
[Amit Varma]: the thing is, you spend 567 years, whatever it is writing a book, and then you read a
[Amit Varma]: review, where the person will never know the book as well as you do. So you feel wronged
[Guest]: by it. There is the criticism that you get for a book for whether the reviewer doesn't
[Guest]: agree with what you have said, or takes issue with your ideas. And that I think no writer
[Guest]: ever really feels deeply hurt by somebody disagreeing with the viewpoint. When there's
[Guest]: the review that you must write when a book is very incompetently written, or is actually
[Guest]: prejudiced or malicious in some way. And there, I think one should reserve the strongest possible,
[Guest]: you know, then it's a rhetorical battle where there's actually something very damaging going
[Guest]: on, you know, some kinds of argument that are present in India right now. People extend
[Guest]: those argument to book length forms. If one were to say like, take off your gloves and
[Guest]: do not punch hard in writing about these pieces, even if it's from a different point of view,
[Guest]: you have to accept that, you know, this is a part of the world of debate and of ideas
[Guest]: and one should take, try to give everybody the benefit of the doubt.
[Guest]: I agree with you. I'm not talking about the normative end. I'm talking about the positive
[Amit Varma]: side of things, the way things actually are. Yes. You know, of course, everyone should,
[Guest]: you know, not take reviews too hard and just get on with the job.
[Guest]: They don't and that's how it is. That's how it is in most places. And there are some people
[Guest]: also skulk past when I see them in certain rooms. But sometimes equally, we have become
[Guest]: friends later, you know, 5-10 years later. And since we are in this moment, I will like
[Guest]: to supply the last ending to this Nagarkar unfortunate story because actually I was thinking
[Guest]: of him when I said, you know, like, you regret writing a very cutting piece about a less
[Guest]: good book by actually a very good writer. You know, I think Cuckold is one of the greatest
[Guest]: novels in the history of the Indian novel. It was very unfortunate, came out the same
[Guest]: year as The God of Small Things when they're both equally good books. And as a book about
[Guest]: what the role music plays in human affairs, I don't think I've read another Indian novel
[Guest]: that so deeply gets the place of music in Indian life. And unfortunately, that book
[Guest]: didn't arrive. I was only 18 when I was and, you know, suddenly a book pops up and somebody
[Guest]: says, will you review it? And you start reading and you think it's very badly written, you
[Guest]: write it up, you never realize. But four or five years ago, I was sitting at breakfast
[Guest]: in a literary festival in Kolkata and right next to me, I saw a tall, stooping, kutat
[Guest]: figure, kutta pajama, Mr. Nagarkar. And all these years somehow, I didn't know whether
[Guest]: he actually knew me by face, but whenever I saw him, I realized, you know, this is not,
[Guest]: let's not, whatever. But I walked, I changed my tables, I walked up to him, sat across
[Guest]: the chair from him and said, I don't know if you remember me, but I'm Chandra Haas and
[Guest]: I remember many years this happened. And I heard you were very upset by it. And he said,
[Guest]: no, no, I wasn't. And perhaps it was, I don't know what it was. And I said, whatever it
[Guest]: was, I want to say sorry, because I realized the ways in which I might have got that wrong
[Guest]: or you got it wrong. And that misperception or misimpression has stayed. And I just want
[Guest]: to make it clear, you know, I admire you as a very, very great Indian writer. It was
[Guest]: just that book that I was writing about. It wasn't writing about you as a writer per se.
[Guest]: And very sportingly, he said, absolutely, you don't need to explain so much. I get what
[Guest]: you're saying completely. And we had a, I mean, we didn't have a long conversation,
[Guest]: but we shared a coffee across the table. And that's my last memory of him. So you know,
[Guest]: while we're on the subject, I want to acknowledge the generosity and grace of a very great writer.
[Amit Varma]: Coming back to that earlier subject, you mentioned about masculinity. And one often wonders whether
[Amit Varma]: this very great writer would have been as generous when he was say 25. And chances are
[Amit Varma]: probably not, you know, you're maybe carrying that grudge a little bit. Yes. So let's talk
[Amit Varma]: about that. Because before we started this, when we were at breakfast, you mentioned about
[Amit Varma]: how it might be harder to come to terms with yourself as a man than it is to come to terms
[Amit Varma]: with yourself as a human being. Which again, struck me as one of those quotes, if I read
[Unknown]: it in a book, I'd write it at the back, and then I'd follow your hack and, you know, start
[Amit Varma]: my review with it. What do you mean by that?
[Guest]: Well, there are many contexts in which that statement can be interpreted. But I think
[Guest]: if I look at my life, I think I was saying in the context of my own life, I found it
[Guest]: much harder to work out how to be a man. And perhaps every man in our time of shifting
[Guest]: very rapidly shifting gender relations has some version of this. It's harder to work
[Guest]: out how to be a man than to be a human being, not only in this present day sense of revised
[Guest]: gender, long overdue revision of gender norms. But also historically, you know, men have
[Guest]: always found it difficult to be men. And, you know, this dinner party conversation,
[Guest]: what if women rule the world? Would we have so many wars? Would there be so much corruption?
[Guest]: Would there be so much competitiveness? I don't know if the answer is yes or no. There's
[Guest]: certainly plenty of vicious women out there. But I think we are not prepared by education
[Guest]: to deal with certain aspects of our history, our psychological makeup, or if we are, it
[Guest]: is only to repeat the forms of the past. And there are many unseen spaces, we are not told
[Guest]: what we learn about sex from books and not from your mother or father. To learn about
[Guest]: it from your mother would be a different thing from learning about it from your father. Strange
[Guest]: though the thought may seem I cannot imagine discussing this with my parents. And if your
[Guest]: mother is listening to this. If there's anything you think I don't know, I mean, come on, like
[Guest]: I'm coming back home in three weeks. Let's sit down and chat. But in the main, I generally
[Guest]: I found it's bizarre, you know, now, after my father passed away, I found myself in a
[Guest]: two woman family, most of my 20s, my mother and my sister. And since then, I've either
[Guest]: lived alone or back to all women families. Now I live with my wife, my daughter, and
[Guest]: sometimes my mother-in-law also comes to stay over, particularly because she wants to have
[Guest]: a chat with me. And strangely enough, I think back about my life and had almost no close
[Guest]: male friends in my 20s, other than you and a couple of others. Now, I would say bizarrely
[Guest]: enough, my closest friends are all men. And what is the hinge on which this entire switch
[Guest]: has occurred? Will it again change back to something else? Like I think I would say my
[Guest]: main success socially in my last 10 years, I was always interested in women and I always
[Guest]: got along very well with them. I had many close women friends and I feel to whatever
[Guest]: extent possible, I'm sure I have many misperceptions, biases, whatever, but I get I can sit down
[Guest]: and have a heart to heart talk with a woman. I found it much harder to set up the space
[Guest]: with men. And partly it was not my fault. Partly it was not the other side's fault and
[Guest]: whose fault was this? No one's fault. It's not really anyone's fault, but it is a problem
[Guest]: to be solved. And in this way, I feel happy. So in the last eight or nine years, I find
[Guest]: I can reach out to men, including a certain kind of South Asian. The only person I can't
[Guest]: still get across to is a certain kind of South Asian man who lets makes you want to do, who
[Guest]: lets you do all the work in reaching them. You know, 99% of the work is yours and I will
[Guest]: utter one or two words on this side and always make sure that they keep you at bay. I'm not
[Guest]: interested in that sort of dialogue, but with almost everyone else, I think I've, especially
[Guest]: I think having not had a very deep male presence in my life in my 20s, I think from about 30
[Guest]: onwards, I've really have a lot of father figures in my life, all the way from five
[Guest]: or six years older to me to 30, 40 years older to me, you know, all the way from someone
[Guest]: like a Pushpesh Pant to somebody, you know, someone who might have met only two or three
[Guest]: years ago. And in this way, I think as a continuum of masculinity, I feel we've learned a lot
[Guest]: from each other. The things I've learned from them, I think I'm sure things I've given them.
[Guest]: And between us, we make a good team in different countries and continents, though we may be.
[Guest]: And whenever we get back together, there's more things to learn. And we give each other
[Guest]: and we give outwards, i.e. we link up and we can create spaces for younger people like
[Guest]: that. And this way, I feel, you know, we have not exactly solved, but we've definitely made
[Guest]: a dent in this issue of men sort of not sharing a lot with each other. When you go to another
[Guest]: man with a problem, they make jokes about you. So you retreat again. And there's a locker
[Guest]: room style conversation. I don't know what it's like in sports teams. I'd be very interested
[Guest]: to know in the Indian cricket team, do they actually speak about girlfriends, sex, love,
[Guest]: if someone is depressed or break up, what sort of, you know, that would be a very interesting
[Guest]: crucible of masculinity where you both very hyper masculine and you are trying to or you
[Guest]: should be someone else. But at least in Indian life, I think this, therefore, this notion
[Guest]: of a gender above gender, a space above gender, that even while you're fighting the gender
[Guest]: wars and in the gender things, I have a lot of sympathy for this idea that even in your
[Guest]: deepest relationships, I believe in love. You know, when you marry somebody, you obviously
[Guest]: carry your biographies as a man and woman and the conflicts and you know, who cooks,
[Guest]: who does the labor, who picks up the child or whatever. But at some level, I think as
[Guest]: a 21st century man, as a woman in any culture, aside with the power and the politics, you
[Guest]: must make the room to surrender and to forget who you are and become a nameless human being,
[Guest]: just a human being and forget that inheritance of masculinity and femininity and be two human
[Guest]: beings on a common cause in life. And that there, I think is a real space for dialogue
[Guest]: even across gender and in marriage and all these spaces which have become a little hollowed
[Guest]: out now because those norms have at the same time, you know, for many of us, marriage is
[Guest]: something different from what it was for our parents. And some people just are not interested
[Guest]: in the idea for very good reasons. But that's why if we want to revitalize the idea of marriage
[Guest]: as well, to my mind, as a thinker, as a writer, this would be one way of doing it, that we
[Guest]: are not married as man and woman or as men and women, we are married for some other reason
[Guest]: to find how can we let go of masculinity and femininity in a space where there's some other
[Guest]: energy at work. And of course, there's a practical element to this in your life. But even as
[Guest]: an idea, these are the things that interest me. And to close on this, I recently read
[Guest]: a book that explained to me, you know, one of the problems of talking about masculinity
[Guest]: now is that these days is that feminist is an endless road. Masculinist, there's a block
[Guest]: at every station because of the, again, that is a separate world with a separate history.
[Guest]: And your conversation can be interrupted or you actually have to find male only spaces
[Guest]: where you can talk, you know, man to man in a different sense. But I have a lot of respect
[Guest]: for the ideas of Robert Bly, you know, the American poet and a very deep thinker on myth,
[Guest]: Jungian psychology, fairy tale, religion, what does this all mean? And what do these
[Guest]: mean for modern life? There's a book I recently found by Iron John, which I read with the
[Guest]: greatest pleasure about the idea that it's basically a retelling over and over again
[Guest]: of this, of a fairy tale from the Grimm brothers about a beast and a wild beast near a pond
[Guest]: and it being wounded in some sense. I forget the exact story now, but it's a metaphor for
[Guest]: there being a beast inside you, whether as a man or as a human being. I can only speak
[Guest]: from my own experience. And you can never tame the beast. And if you domesticate it
[Guest]: too much, you actually lose the energy, that wildness, that animal energy that you have.
[Guest]: How do you, can you channel its energy so that it actually makes something positive
[Guest]: in your life, that aggression, that spirit, that animal spirit, to turn it from something
[Guest]: destructive or volcanic into something that actually is nurturing, tender, giving. I think
[Guest]: this is a challenge that all of us must face in the second half of our lives for, you know,
[Guest]: where can you take it? And should you always be aware of it? And can you, by thinking about
[Guest]: it, actually, you know, transform it from something you read to something inside you
[Guest]: and where can you go with it? And I think there's many precedents in India for that.
[Guest]: If you take the last millennium, the Sufi movement, the Bhakti movement, many movements
[Guest]: to break down barriers are in some way linked to this sort of breaking down a barrier within
[Guest]: your own self with the other inside you.
[Amit Varma]: That's very resonant. And do you remember how the middle stage got named the middle
[Amit Varma]: stage?
[Guest]: How did it?
[Guest]: When I started the middle stage, I based it on a quote by Theodore Dreiser, which I'll
[Amit Varma]: read out for you. Quote, our civilization is still in the middle stage, scarcely beast
[Amit Varma]: in that it is no longer wholly guided by instinct, scarcely human in that it is not yet wholly
[Amit Varma]: guided by reason. Stop quote. And I often think that the great mark of civilization,
[Amit Varma]: the struggle of civilization, in a sense, is that we are taking control of ourselves,
[Amit Varma]: like not like, you know, not letting our hardwiring control who we are, in a sense, no, you know,
[Amit Varma]: nurture fighting back against nature, not even nurture, but sort of using culture to
[Unknown]: mitigate some of the bad aspects of hardwiring and a lot of hardwiring is, of course, contradictory
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth. And therefore, I wonder, like, you know, I've not thought of it in
[Amit Varma]: terms of masculinity or whatever. But one of the journeys that I've been forced to make
[Amit Varma]: and trying to make and I don't know if one can be completely successful is that journey
[Amit Varma]: where you're comfortable in your own skin, where you can kind of reflect enough on yourself
[Amit Varma]: to realize why you do the things you do. And then you can sort of come to terms with what
[Amit Varma]: you are and reconcile that with what you want to be and find that kind of middle ground
[Amit Varma]: as it were, or, you know, go closer to that perfect version of yourself. But I've never
[Amit Varma]: thought of it in masculine terms, obviously, looking back, as we were earlier discussing
[Amit Varma]: a lot of the tendencies that we had in our youth, like that hyper competitiveness, or
[Amit Varma]: all of that is a masculine thing. Yes, you know, and is that kind of what you meant as
[Amit Varma]: well? I mean, obviously, what we are mitigating this notion of the masculine is not just the
[Amit Varma]: instinctive ways in which we behave because of our hormones and so on. But also the dangerous
[Amit Varma]: social notions of this is what men are and this is what women are and dealing with that
[Guest]: as well. Yes, yes. And trying to transcend that for at least the people who know you
[Guest]: to make another society of people whom you know where you go past these ideas. But I
[Guest]: was even struck by that quote, what the middle stage, you know, in that quote by Dreiser,
[Guest]: not without reason, he seems to end on the point by saying, if you're all more guided
[Guest]: by reason, or mostly guided by reason, we would be in a good place. I tend to disagree
[Guest]: with that. And I think it was like a kind of fantasy of the Enlightenment and of the
[Guest]: West of political life in the last 200 years, again, for which can contrary evidence is
[Guest]: emerging on every single day all around us, that reasonable people are somewhere somewhat
[Guest]: and rationality in the end always yields good results. Since humanity is also fundamentally
[Guest]: irrational, I would argue that the problem is somehow to combine the rational and irrational
[Guest]: into a package whereby neither of them destroys the other and that each has a space of free
[Guest]: expression. Therefore, your sport, your art, whatever, these all actually caters the irrational.
[Guest]: When they are taken out into politics, family, they can be very destructive. But in the end,
[Guest]: I would finally say, and this is also the insight of Taoism and some kinds of philosophy
[Guest]: that are not about language, that there is some kinds of meaning that cannot be articulated
[Guest]: in language. And the more you grow as a writer, you realize that this is true. Some poets
[Guest]: know it, some other kinds of thinkers know it. And therefore, actually, you cannot reason
[Guest]: your way out of problems, even such as this one, as being comfortable in your own self.
[Guest]: You must have, and I think I most closely came in touch with this idea in the last seven
[Guest]: or eight years and now firmly believe in it, that we suddenly break out spaces, moments,
[Guest]: relationships or encounters in your life where you take such a leap in those two, three days
[Guest]: or whatever, that you can never return to who you used to be before. There's always
[Guest]: that you plus who you, what you experienced or what you knew. And those transformative
[Guest]: little encounters, those little jumps are actually, when combined with the more reasoned
[Guest]: and planned trajectory, that mix of rational and irrational in your own self actually makes
[Guest]: for a very pleasant space where you also surprise yourself because there are ways in which you
[Guest]: can surprise yourself. And you have to then start plotting for ways in which you can surprise
[Guest]: yourself, do something new. I never was interested in agriculture. Now I think about it almost
[Guest]: every day, meet other kinds of folk. And that way, I think we're also very lucky, you know,
[Guest]: we have the chance to travel and live in different cultures, travel to different places. Living
[Guest]: for three or four months in Brazil, when I was 37 or 38. Actually, you know, even the
[Guest]: fact I've come here today wearing shorts, which I never used to wear before in public
[Guest]: at the very least, I grew up like a good Indian man never shows his legs.
[Guest]: Yeah. Yeah, me too boss. Maybe it's a vintage, I never show my legs outside the house.
[Guest]: Yes, I find the Brazilians something that all Indians should go to Brazil, there should
[Guest]: be some special diplomatic exchange where you know, we reduce the fares and make a subsidy
[Guest]: like the Hajj. There should be like a sole pilgrimage to go to Brazil, to learn the art
[Guest]: of letting go and of a giving physicality. It's not like there's no bad touch in Brazil
[Guest]: as well there is. But I found that lots of men and women in the street when they meet
[Guest]: each other, they hug, poke, kiss, pinch, prod, squeeze, without the sense that you are transgressing
[Guest]: someone's personal space, across gender and within gender, both. And as Indians, perhaps
[Guest]: we are imprisoned in both these spaces. And suddenly I found it very liberating. And I
[Guest]: almost like this since, you know, one could, any Indian can pass off as Brazilian after
[Guest]: a few days of this, you suddenly realize how pleasurable it is. And also the art of letting
[Guest]: go and living in the moment, you know, we are brought up always thinking of security,
[Guest]: your flat, your EMI, your rent, your whatever, don't do this beta, whatever, you know, in
[Guest]: life as an adult, you have to unlearn so much of what you're being taught. And this is very
[Guest]: important. And I think, again, this is where perhaps both you and I are more comfortable
[Guest]: with ourselves, that we, part of being more relaxed about who you are, is learning how
[Guest]: to enjoy yourself in the present moment. It's of treating that present moment as a journey
[Guest]: towards somebody else. I don't want to become somebody else, that that will happen in its
[Guest]: own time. Right now, who I am, who I am today sitting across from you, and the fact that
[Guest]: we can channel our shared histories and our personal histories together in this space,
[Guest]: which has this energy, the books of your library, whatever, you know, this room, this view,
[Guest]: this Bombay, the city, that is the best you will be for that moment in time. So once you
[Guest]: can let go of these things and stay, stay where you are, temporarily speaking, it's
[Guest]: really very pleasant. And what more can one say?
[Amit Varma]: This is something I keep reminding myself of, like, when I was young, my ideas of happiness
[Amit Varma]: were tied up with goals. Yes, I want to do this, I want to write this book, get this
[Amit Varma]: a claim, blah, blah, blah, blah. And I think as you grow older, you realize that those
[Unknown]: goals are irrelevant. Maybe they'll happen, maybe they won't happen, probably they won't
[Amit Varma]: happen. But the important thing is that in the present moment, you're blessed with so
[Amit Varma]: much. Yes. And just sit back and enjoy that because there is sort of so much to enjoy
[Amit Varma]: in that, by the way, about that whole Brazil India exchange program thing that they are
[Amit Varma]: touchy feely, and you want to send young Indian boys. I ask you with folded hand emoji, kindly
[Amit Varma]: do not give these ideas to anybody in authority, you know, especially Brazil will not be very
[Guest]: happy about this. Perhaps the young Indian boys will also learn that, you know, one can
[Guest]: touch in a different way, like to make somebody else feel comfortable as well. Let's leave
[Guest]: it for when we can actually take a shipment over. Let's not be condescending to young
[Amit Varma]: Indian boys. There are many things about them that we might... On that generous note, let's
[Amit Varma]: take a quick commercial break. Long before I was a podcaster, I was a writer. In fact,
[Amit Varma]: chances are that many of you first heard of me because of my blog India Uncut, which was
[Amit Varma]: active between 2003 and 2009 and became somewhat popular at the time. I love the freedom the
[Amit Varma]: form gave me. And I feel I was shaped by it in many ways. I exercise my writing muscle
[Amit Varma]: every day and was forced to think about many different things because I wrote about many
[Amit Varma]: different things. Well, that phase in my life ended for various reasons. And now it is time
[Amit Varma]: to revive it. Only now I'm doing it through a newsletter. I have started the India Uncut
[Amit Varma]: newsletter at indiancut.substack.com where I will write regularly about whatever catches
[Amit Varma]: my fancy. I'll write about some of the themes I cover in this podcast and about much else.
[Amit Varma]: So please do head on over to indiancut.substack.com and subscribe. It is free. Once you sign up,
[Amit Varma]: each new installment that I write will land up in your email inbox. You don't need to
[Amit Varma]: go anywhere. So subscribe now for free. The India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm chatting with my good friend Chandrahar Choudhary
[Amit Varma]: on his journey so far. And let's get back to the chronological and the linear progression
[Amit Varma]: of your life. So in Cambridge, you start writing reviews, you get this chance, you write, you
[Amit Varma]: also write a review for the Washington Post, you start reaching out to others. And then
[Amit Varma]: you came back to India. And what's the scene then? Like what made you go for cricket journalism?
[Amit Varma]: What made you join us at Cricket Info? And what was that period like? Because there were
[Amit Varma]: a couple of sentences kind of talking about how office life didn't really appeal to you.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about what that period was like, because I have kind of been a witness
[Amit Varma]: to it, but a witness to it from outside your skin. So from inside your skin.
[Guest]: Well, what can one say, you know, I think I should preface any comments of mine by saying
[Guest]: I probably was on the worst employees anybody could ever hire. I might have looked superficially
[Guest]: promising, but I just cannot, constitutionally, I cannot really work for someone else until
[Guest]: I feel I'm part of the team, a creative part of the team, I have some investment in that.
[Guest]: So and especially when I was younger, I think it was even harder for me. Just like you,
[Guest]: I think from the age of seven or eight onwards, I spent my entire day other than books, thinking
[Guest]: about cricket, living, playing, dreaming all day long, and reading cricket books as well.
[Guest]: Even you can combine cricket and literature. And finally, bizarrely enough, this was the
[Guest]: path that opened out to me when I graduated from university. Nowadays, young people know
[Guest]: even when they're 12, what they want to do in their lives. At 23, I had no clue. But
[Guest]: I'd written a couple of cricket pieces doing an internship in Wisden in England. And I
[Guest]: think Cricket Info was starting up or looking for some new people and Sambit Bal wrote to
[Guest]: me while I was still in England saying, do you want to come to Bombay and start work
[Guest]: for us here? I was so delighted to be offered a job. And in cricket as well. Not only was
[Guest]: I very delighted, my friends at university, my Indian friends were 10 times more delighted
[Guest]: for me. So they almost pressured me into taking up this offer because there can't be anything
[Guest]: greater than cricket is your work. Whereas for us, they used to watch it on the side
[Guest]: from the investment banks or whatever. So I came back and I was very happy and I couldn't
[Guest]: wait to start work. I think I even curtailed my vacation in England. I was so keen to enter
[Guest]: that world of employment and you know, going to work and being part of you know, the economy,
[Guest]: etc. And it was very exciting. You know, I remember very vividly the first time coming
[Guest]: in and you go to office and you feel very grown up, etc. But in the end, as I think
[Guest]: so many of us, it's strange how many writers emerged from the three or four year period
[Guest]: in Cricket Info's life. To that extent, I think it was a great laboratory. It set very
[Guest]: high standards. Sambit held a very high line. I remember every writer in Cricket Info newly
[Guest]: arriving had to go through two or three bruising encounters. In cricket, you went through with
[Guest]: Courtney Walsh, Gertley Ambrose, Akhtar. In cricket writing, you went through Stephen
[Guest]: Lynch. You wrote a piece, then suddenly there would come an email from England where he
[Guest]: had taken, micro-analyzed your grammar, syntax, punctuation, sentence structure, use of terminology,
[Guest]: hyphens, apostrophes, and there were so many red marks. It was the sort of literary criticism
[Guest]: I never had when I was a student at university. Those bits were enormously exciting and being,
[Guest]: you know, having pieces, writing them and having them come out on the website. They're
[Guest]: all wonderful, but somewhere I think I realized cricket is not going to be my life. And if
[Guest]: it is not going to be, then what is the point of committing to a very long period? It's
[Guest]: merely an intermediate stage. And I think very early on, I was thinking of how to get
[Guest]: moving and perhaps the greatest, you know, Robert Blyth says this, and it is true. Many
[Guest]: things that are very dark in your life when you experience them, actually a certain kind
[Guest]: of gift in retrospect. And I think the best thing that happened to me was my very serious
[Guest]: girlfriend at the time went to America to study and we broke up and it was very upsetting
[Guest]: for me, but freed of the need to earn a salary, to earn the respect of your partner's family.
[Guest]: And I always felt that I needed a family like that, given my troubles with my own family
[Guest]: and this emotional need for the security of somebody else's family. Freed of that need,
[Guest]: I suddenly decided I can't bear to go to work anymore also. I want, I can't bear to face
[Guest]: the world. And that was bad. You are turning away from people and society because you can't
[Guest]: take it. The good bit of that is you're turning away towards something productive, which is
[Guest]: books again. And as I recall in my memoir, in my country's literature, you know, books
[Guest]: have always meant so many great things for me. So many spaces where, you know, it solved
[Guest]: a problem in my life until one day itself became a kind of problem. And it is something
[Guest]: to think about as you go through life. But so this was my journey. And then I thought,
[Guest]: you know, at the very least, if I stay at home, I patch together a few book reviews,
[Guest]: at least I'll have my control of my own life. And I gave up my job and said my goodbyes,
[Guest]: including to our test matches, who was the final score? I think 53-49 to you. We must
[Amit Varma]: play some other time.
[Amit Varma]: I think in office cricket, you must have been ahead of me in terms of score. But the most
[Guest]: memorable dismissals would certainly have had me as a bowler.
[Guest]: The long term trend might have been of my superiority, but there's a certain stage when
[Guest]: I could not deal with that spin swing where I lost so many test matches that you know,
[Guest]: it was I could never claw back the entire. Again, it proves my theory that when you make
[Guest]: progress, you must head on in fifth gear so that you know, you can have enough capital
[Amit Varma]: for leaner times.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I was I was totally like Alan Donald plus Muthaiya Murli Dharam. How do you deal
[Amit Varma]: with that? But you spoke about the role literature was playing in your life. And I want to read
[Amit Varma]: out another lovely passage by you, where you write, having been formed by reading novels
[Amit Varma]: as much as the contours of my own biography and the conflicts of the psyche, I have in
[Amit Varma]: middle age come to see novels also as an unusual kind of wisdom literature, a place where a
[Amit Varma]: young person acutely conscious of callowness and malformation may be exposed to the nuances
[Amit Varma]: of human nature, social life, romantic love, and history to the subtle workings of cause
[Amit Varma]: and effect, and also a sort of imaginative safe space where rage, violence, grief and
[Amit Varma]: trauma can be vicariously and cathartically experienced, and one's own psychic wounds
[Amit Varma]: healed. I don't doubt that this was one of the main reasons for my attraction to novels
[Amit Varma]: in my youth. A novel can be a refuge for those who are thrown off by life for the action
[Amit Varma]: of understanding what is going on in a text can serve as a sort of substitute for the
[Amit Varma]: challenges of action in the world, stop quote. And you of course, right, you know, this seems
[Amit Varma]: so dramatic. It's like you completely gave up the real world and shut yourself in a room
[Guest]: and read books. But that's not at all what happened.
[Guest]: No. I mean, when you read this, do you find it answers something about your own experience
[Guest]: of reading novels or what they mean to you? Or you have a different relationship with
[Guest]: novels perhaps?
[Amit Varma]: No, it does. I think that is sort of a role. And this will probably lead me to my next
[Amit Varma]: question before we get back to biography. But I find that that role of how does one
[Amit Varma]: of the shaping of the self, in this case, you speak about reading novels as the shaping
[Amit Varma]: of the self. And that's played a little bit in the sense that every time you read a novel,
[Amit Varma]: you are experiencing another life and another person's head and that can give you much greater
[Amit Varma]: insight into your own blind spots and into the things that you do not see. But to a certain
[Amit Varma]: extent, more of that has happened from doing different, I mean, just from living in ways
[Amit Varma]: that one can't express, but also from doing different things. Like I just think that doing
[Amit Varma]: five hour conversations has probably made me a better person because I now try to listen
[Amit Varma]: more. I am less judgmental. I am more interested in people's personal journeys as opposed to
[Amit Varma]: whether or not they agree with me and all of that. And I think those things also make
[Amit Varma]: a difference. And I'll come to my next question with this because it's something that you
[Amit Varma]: no doubt have a lot to say about, which is that I have found that and I wrote an essay
[Amit Varma]: on this a while back also about how the form of something that you do can shape the content
[Amit Varma]: of what you're forced to do with it and therefore shape you as a person. Like just the example,
[Amit Varma]: like if instead of five hour interviews, I was doing five minute interviews, they would
[Amit Varma]: be extremely shallow, you know, and that would force a certain kind of work. And that would
[Amit Varma]: force a different kind of person. Whereas over here, I am forced to listen to reflect,
[Amit Varma]: to read much more deeply than I otherwise would not just to read one book by the author,
[Amit Varma]: if you're talking about a book, but read everything is written, for example, which happens very
[Amit Varma]: often. And I think that's so the form changed the work that I did, and therefore that changed
[Amit Varma]: me. And when I applied that to say what somebody like you would be doing, that when you would
[Amit Varma]: have started off, there would have been a particular form in which you were supposed
[Amit Varma]: to write book reviews, like there would be a standard template of how a review is written,
[Amit Varma]: say in a foreign newspaper, when you write for an Indian newspaper, also, there is a
[Amit Varma]: form that is at least at a very basic surface level dictated by the number of words that
[Amit Varma]: you have to play with. But then you start blogging and all that goes out of the window,
[Amit Varma]: and somebody else, and maybe you should do this as well, could might well have started
[Amit Varma]: talking about books on a YouTube channel, and that goes out of the window, because those
[Amit Varma]: forms don't then matter. You don't, you don't have to, you can just approach a book in very
[Amit Varma]: different ways, look at different angles of it. So do you feel that, you know, being able
[Amit Varma]: to play around with different forms changed what you kind of came up with how you thought
[Amit Varma]: about books, how you had to read them?
[Guest]: No, but I would say that the deepest thread of my adult life is the dialogue between reading
[Guest]: novels, the writing of them, including also encompassing the way I see people. But that
[Guest]: long form bit you speak of and that structure actually is a structure that you create in
[Guest]: your own life when you set out to write a book, and it's going to be three or four years
[Guest]: of my life, I've only written one book in less than four years in my life of my three
[Guest]: or four, which is Days of my China Dragon, even those I wrote at many points over a decade.
[Guest]: And that continuous dialogue of creating a certain structure, a tone, a voice, a life,
[Guest]: a set of words, an experience that flows in time is, in a way, I think of writing a novel
[Guest]: as an extremely good way to live, because you are forever ploughing a certain patch
[Guest]: of earth and making it deeper learning the contours of the of the space. And by the end
[Guest]: of it, you don't just write novels, novels also write you back, your characters write
[Guest]: you back, they create you as you as you create them. It's a continuous dialogue. And so it's
[Guest]: a very life transforming from novel to novel. And thankfully, in my life, I've always embarked
[Guest]: on projects, which when I finished them, I almost didn't recognize who I was, either
[Guest]: so much time had elapsed, or something had happened in the writing of it, I became a
[Guest]: better writer. No novel of mine resembles the other in terms of style. So I now realize
[Guest]: I have an ethic of writing, making a new style for every book. The people I met or the things
[Guest]: I had to answer to write those novels, for instance, the exploration of tribal life and
[Guest]: the history of Indian democracy in clouds, always took me into new parts of India, which
[Guest]: purely as a book reviewer, as a person living in Bombay, I would never have gone. And I
[Guest]: was forced to find answers or questions I had in my head and answer them at length through
[Guest]: people's accounts. So it's a certain model of research, a certain model of study, a certain
[Guest]: model of solitude, a certain model of continuous practice, a certain model of revision, all
[Guest]: being plotted on one on top of the other, till the time when something comes out on
[Guest]: the other side, which is very interesting to construct and you have full freedom and
[Guest]: power to do it by yourself. You know that no one is in a hurry to read you. You have
[Guest]: to like almost like a scientist work out what method works for you. When do you write best
[Guest]: in the day? Can you get high, for instance, with coffee, which is also something to discuss.
[Guest]: Could you get high selectively at a certain moment of the day so that you're primed to
[Guest]: write for two hours, and that's all you need. From then you can come down the rest of the
[Guest]: day in a very nice slope and get ready again the next morning. If you write every day,
[Guest]: are you a better writer than when you write in large bursts in two or three months? For
[Guest]: me that works. Once I can string together six or seven days, I really find it much easier
[Guest]: to write after three, four months. It's the best place to be. When you have three months
[Guest]: of writing behind you, you can write endlessly the rest of your life, which is why sometimes
[Guest]: I tell myself, you know, the best time to start a novel is the day after you finish
[Guest]: your previous one, because you just know how to do it. And once you let those six months,
[Guest]: eight months, one year elapse of waiting, when you start out again, you are actually
[Guest]: a beginner. You're nothing more than a beginner. Your experience is of no help. It's that internal
[Guest]: rhythm and that sense of confidence and language that in the end you want. And without that,
[Guest]: that's very grounding as a personality. That's why I feel although I might have been socially
[Guest]: very inept and wouldn't know how to, you know, be in a relationship or be a very jealous
[Guest]: or insecure boyfriend or a son who didn't understand some things or a very typical kind
[Guest]: of man, at the very least, from these kinds of things, I realized I need to apply this
[Guest]: sort of method to life as well. And there can be interesting results, the things that
[Guest]: you don't see, which require some deeper understanding. And that way, you know, novels are bottomless.
[Guest]: And that's what I really like about the great novels. I mean, you can read every page, every
[Guest]: line, every chapter. It's written with some sort of secret force that it's very hard to
[Guest]: achieve long form in work. You know, they're really, really solid books.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a bit more about your writing process. But before that, I'm also intrigued by this
[Amit Varma]: thing that you said that some of the application that you take to the act of writing can also
[Amit Varma]: help you in other ways in your life, being a better son or boyfriend or whatever.
[Guest]: Yes, you know, I think the most difficult problem of being a human being separate from
[Guest]: being a writer of human being body and in space and time is that and it's a perfectly
[Guest]: I have lots of empathy for people in making mistakes for this reason. When you see two
[Guest]: people arguing on a street, even if you don't know them very well in a room, you immediately
[Guest]: feel like you can analyze the situation. This person is making this mistake. That person
[Guest]: is making that mistake. You cannot analyze yourself from outside of yourself because
[Guest]: you cannot see yourself in that same way. The person making the mistakes and the person
[Guest]: analyzing the mistakes are coming from the same source. And therefore, there is not the
[Guest]: third. That's why I really love Adam Smith and his idea of the impartial spectator and
[Guest]: the fact that you have to form a space somewhere within yourself to create a part of a personality
[Guest]: that is able to watch yourself from above and analyze yourself so that you don't always
[Guest]: end up coming to the conclusion that the other side is wrong because that's the most natural
[Guest]: conclusion to have. My point of view is better than yours. They insulted me. They didn't
[Guest]: say this. They also are. You realize they also are thinking of you in exactly the same
[Guest]: way as you're thinking of them. But your investment in the situation means that you cannot see
[Guest]: that and being blind to that, no matter how much you try to do until you say, what am
[Guest]: I looking like to you? What you say and how you come across are two very different things.
[Guest]: And as you grow older, you realize, you know, that you are in control of how you come across.
[Guest]: If I were to look at a video of myself 20 years ago, I'm sure no such video exists.
[Guest]: I'm thankful for that. I'd say, what are you? There's such a gap between what you're trying
[Guest]: to do and what you're doing that, you know, it's not going to work out. Nobody is going
[Guest]: to be impressed by your message. Your rhetorical power is not to any great end and you are
[Guest]: missing so much about yourself. So in that way, the main thing here also, you know, is
[Guest]: that, you know, this was very grateful not to have a job. You have endless hours, sometimes
[Guest]: too many to reflect on your mistakes and on how you're living your life. And that spiritual
[Guest]: aspect of reflection and meditation in a writerly life, although it may or may not help the
[Guest]: work, it makes you, I think it's good for living. That it tells you that, you know,
[Guest]: on a daily basis, you have to think about how you come across what you're doing and
[Guest]: you advance and you retreat, you advance and you retreat, day after day after day, into
[Guest]: books, out of books, into life, out of life and your time. That's why I really think as
[Guest]: a young person, you should try, especially if you're a young woman in day to day, find
[Guest]: a way to rent a space for yourself, a house for yourself for a year or two and leave behind
[Guest]: your last name as your identity. Be your first name and whatever you're growing into, cook
[Guest]: for yourself, call people over, make your own library and reflect on who you are and
[Guest]: where you're going and then go out into the world again. That is a different kind of education.
[Amit Varma]: Very important. So do you feel that helped you a lot? Like tell me a bit about that than
[Guest]: just living alone, cooking, calling friends. I think the greatest day of my adult life
[Guest]: was the day finally when I broke with the Indian consensus that if you live in the same
[Guest]: city as your parents, you live in the same house as your parents, which I reflexively
[Guest]: always accepted until there was so much conflict over a particular relationship of mine. I
[Guest]: realized that, you know, almost as a punishment, I decided I have to leave and find my own
[Guest]: house. I left home. I landed up in Dadar. I walked around a bit. I went to a property
[Guest]: dealer. By evening, you know, this is a remarkable luck in Bombay. By evening, I knew the place
[Guest]: where I wanted to live. A small one room apartment in a very run down building at Century Bazaar
[Guest]: Junction. Two weeks later, I packed up my things. I still had the luxury of being able
[Guest]: to go back to my mother's house, but I packed up my things and left for this place. Within
[Guest]: three days of my arriving there, I went down to this restaurant and met one of the greatest
[Guest]: influences of my life in my 20s, like you, on my 30s, the way you were in my 20s. I met
[Guest]: like the Amit Verma of my 30s, Rupesh Bhai, this restauranteur who used to run an Udupi
[Guest]: restaurant there and set me off on a completely different journey. And a couple of years later,
[Guest]: I left for Delhi. But again, I had a very nice house next door to my old friends. And
[Guest]: these two houses in my life, one in Prabhadevi for two years and one in Kalkaji which I recently
[Guest]: gave up, nine years, the longest I've ever lived anywhere, I think were the two real
[Guest]: universities of my life because I learnt, I might have learnt to be a writer and a person
[Guest]: in economy, a son in all these places, to be a complete human being, I needed a house
[Guest]: of my own, which, you know, when you realise this, you suddenly realise what space means,
[Guest]: what space means in terms of personal power and of growing it as both as a space of interaction
[Guest]: with people and as a space of private retreat. A one room apartment is what you need to be
[Guest]: a writer in some way, where you can go back. That's why so many writers are so attached
[Guest]: to the studios and refuse to give it up. And in that space, I learned how to cook, to invite
[Guest]: people over, to meet people on their own terms, to go back and heal from wounds and traumas
[Guest]: or breakups, to just sleep all day long, to stare at the people tree, to go for a run,
[Guest]: to acquire memories. And when I left that house, you know, it really felt like leaving
[Guest]: a person behind because, how should I put it? All the memories of the people who passed
[Guest]: there are part of your memory of that house and that one room. And, you know, you will
[Guest]: never in any house in the future, sort of, when will you have nine years in another room
[Guest]: to acquire those? They're just part of that juncture in your life. And it was a real training
[Guest]: ground to be, also to be an Indian, you know, there's so many Indians that we don't know
[Guest]: that you almost have to create a little space where those Indians can come together. Maybe
[Guest]: some are still left out, but one must make a bigger India than the one in which one grows
[Guest]: up. And if everyone does that, in the end, when we share our Indias, we construct something
[Guest]: that we can't do by ourselves. And in this way, actually, that one room was my education
[Guest]: for so many things.
[Amit Varma]: And what was your, what was the process of writing your books like? Like, I totally empathize
[Amit Varma]: with what you say about writing as a way of self discovery, like Joan Didion memorably
[Amit Varma]: said, I don't know what I think until I write it down. And I discussed this with Amitabha
[Amit Varma]: Kumar also in the episode I did with him, where writing every day is such a good habit,
[Amit Varma]: because you're deepening your sense of self, you know, deepening yourself.
[Guest]: I heard that and both of you had some very good thoughts on that.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I was struck by that point of his that writing shapes you. And you know, if you are,
[Amit Varma]: let's say you start in exactly the same space. So let's say in alternate universes, one version
[Amit Varma]: of you writes every day, and one person of you doesn't write every day in five years,
[Amit Varma]: I think you are different people. So I get that. So tell me a little bit about your writing
[Amit Varma]: process, because it strikes me that when you're a journalist, like when you're writing reviews,
[Amit Varma]: or when I'm writing columns, or whatever, you're writing to a deadline, you force yourself
[Amit Varma]: to do it, you kind of get the job done. But when you're writing a novel, it's a different
[Amit Varma]: kind of beast. And what I particularly find hard in things that I try to do outside of,
[Amit Varma]: you know, deadline based things, is that I find that discipline hard to come by. Like
[Amit Varma]: in my writing course, for example, out of the four webinars, one is just about process.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, because I feel that that's where I learned the greatest lessons in my life by failing
[Amit Varma]: at it. That it's not important to just have an intellectual understanding of writing and
[Amit Varma]: what you need to do and the craft and all that you actually need to kind of sit down
[Amit Varma]: and write and force yourself. How was it for you when you wrote your novels?
[Guest]: Well, I think as children of the internet, you and me both, I mean, that is the main
[Guest]: the internet is a great resource in the life of a writer and almost the most destructive
[Guest]: force as well. So again, like I was saying, with something that is good and bad size,
[Guest]: you have to learn to channel the good and either turn off the bad, tap off the bad or
[Guest]: also use that in some way. Between books, for instance, I get lazy and wake up in the
[Guest]: morning, check my email on my phone, what's on Facebook, likes, somebody's comments, etc.
[Guest]: Obviously, it's a bad thing to do. But when I've written best in my life, and even now
[Guest]: in the right best is when I wake up in the morning, I turn the internet off. And I only
[Guest]: look at email and everything else after lunch. I have the morning till myself to read and
[Guest]: write on in language that I control. I don't even read the newspaper. And I find suddenly
[Guest]: make a giant space of freedom. It's like a huge, huge space in which you're just floating
[Guest]: like a cloud across this giant sky. And in the beginning, it's a bit disorienting because
[Guest]: one wants to turn away. Okay, you don't know what's your next sentence, let's quickly check
[Guest]: my email or whatever. You've got to learn to train yourself to just live in that space
[Guest]: and make it bigger and bigger. You can you know, like we are having very good coffee.
[Guest]: Now you can break for a coffee, keep returning back to your desk and learn to enjoy and own
[Guest]: your own power over the written word and over language itself. Don't let anybody else's
[Guest]: language infect the place where it's almost like a temple where you are raising up something
[Guest]: that hopefully is permanent. And then you don't get distracted very easily either. And
[Guest]: avoiding distractions and being focused is I think the main thing. And if you have the
[Guest]: same in, luckily I have, you know, I'm able to give the best of my days to writing. The
[Guest]: time when I'm the most awake, my mornings, I never want that to be taken away from me.
[Guest]: And that I think is the ultimate freedom for me in my life. When I wake up in the morning,
[Guest]: no one's in control of my day between eight and lunch. I can read, I can write, I can
[Guest]: write in my notebook. I can work up some ideas. I can go for a little walk, but I'm always
[Guest]: inside the world of my book or whatever I'm writing the essay. And I find, you know, when
[Guest]: these four hours, four hours, four hours add up 25, 26 days of the month, you cannot get
[Guest]: to that place through any other means. It only has to happen as a function of focus,
[Guest]: time and pleasure in that pleasure. You know, this is the paradoxical thing, but human nature,
[Guest]: you can enjoy it so much. But our addiction to short term pleasures is so powerful that
[Guest]: even when you know that your long term pleasure is going to be very fulfilling, you're continually
[Guest]: pulled away and you have to keep on having to sort of like pull yourself back. You have
[Guest]: to learn this about human nature and sort of again, push back against the easy wins
[Unknown]: of the day.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, one concept I'm struck by is that every action you take now is an investment
[Amit Varma]: in your future self. So if I sit down to write, I could say, okay, let me just play one game
[Amit Varma]: of online chess, I'll play a game of Blitz and then I'll and then you play Blitz for
[Amit Varma]: two hours, and your rating goes up. But what you have done is you made your future self
[Amit Varma]: stupider. Because in that unless you want to be a chess professional chess player, because
[Amit Varma]: in that time, you could have been writing or reading if that was part of an extended
[Amit Varma]: habit, your future self would have been that much smarter. But the opportunity cost of
[Amit Varma]: your playing online chess, Candy Crush, whatever the poison might be, is that you're hurting
[Amit Varma]: your future self. Another question is that one thing I find about novelists is that novelists
[Amit Varma]: are the kind of creators who are in a sense, breaking what has become an important commandment
[Amit Varma]: of the creator economy as it were, in the sense that you've quoted Frank Kermode in
[Amit Varma]: an essay writing about Shakespeare, and you've quoted him as saying about Shakespeare, there
[Amit Varma]: is a way of treating Shakespeare as a very good but sometimes not so good poet, as sometimes,
[Amit Varma]: but not always clearly a writer of genius, as always indeed a writer, and to be considered
[Amit Varma]: as such, and you've yourself described Shakespeare as possibly both majestic and fallible. And
[Amit Varma]: it strikes me that one reason why Shakespeare is all of this, these things is that he is
[Amit Varma]: privileging production over perfection. Yes, it's that he's just writing, writing, writing,
[Amit Varma]: and good stuff comes out. And the advice I always give to people and continue to give
[Amit Varma]: is that have a bias for action, you know, wherever there is a trade off between getting
[Amit Varma]: it right and getting it done, have a bias for getting it done because the only way to
[Amit Varma]: achieve excellence is through constant iteration. So write, write, write, write, write, which
[Amit Varma]: is almost a mantra of the creator economy, that just write, write, write, write, write,
[Amit Varma]: quantity, quantity is actually the way to quality in a sense. And that's something that
[Amit Varma]: works in a lot of creative endeavor. But it also seems to me, at the same time, like a
[Amit Varma]: writer who previously come on the show had said perfection is the enemy of production,
[Amit Varma]: which I totally get. But at the same time, when it comes to writing a novel, it almost
[Amit Varma]: feels like you're locking yourself up for four years, or five years or whatever. And
[Amit Varma]: of course, there are people like Simenon who would write a novel in a week. But otherwise,
[Amit Varma]: you're locking yourself up for a long period of time. And you're following almost the opposite
[Amit Varma]: ethic, where you're working, you know, and like our mutual friend, Sonia Falero, with
[Amit Varma]: whom we used to hang out so much in the good old Bombay days, she wrote, I think four drafts
[Amit Varma]: of beautiful things. And they're all different from each other, which is incredible work
[Amit Varma]: ethic, which I cannot imagine myself doing. But I can't imagine myself putting myself
[Amit Varma]: through that. But incredible work ethic. So how does one think about this? Because as
[Amit Varma]: a reviewer, I think one of the things that would have made you a good reviewer is that
[Amit Varma]: you're always writing reviews. There's a year when you write 70 reviews, you do so much
[Amit Varma]: of it that you just become naturally better at it. But at the same time, when it comes
[Amit Varma]: to novel, it's almost as if it demands the opposite approach.
[Guest]: Yes, I very lightly agree. In fact, I mostly disagree with the idea that one should keep
[Guest]: creating, you know, book reviews is part of the economy of literature, somebody has to,
[Guest]: they come out on a regular day of the week, somebody has to write them, the discipline
[Guest]: is important. So you cannot mess with that and say, you can always rewrite your book
[Guest]: review as an essay at much greater length. But it has to be done for a particular day.
[Guest]: So in that sense, that the ethic of production on time, in a reliable and predictable way
[Guest]: applies. But the way to reconcile one kind of thought and the other that one should privilege
[Guest]: perfection is actually, you can keep writing lots and lots of words. But why should they
[Guest]: always be new words? Why can't it be the same words? And that's when you get to the idea
[Guest]: of a draft, even the idea of an essay, you know, the reason why I really like writing
[Guest]: essays that were like one in two weeks, a 1200 word essay, but having two weeks to write
[Guest]: it, you write a draft on Monday, if you had to send it by Monday evening, it would come
[Guest]: out as a very, I'm sure it would be decent to read. But when you rewrite it on Tuesday,
[Guest]: then rewrite it again on Wednesday and Thursday, when you send it off on Friday, every word
[Guest]: you have thought about a few times and you've moved the sentences around, at first you said
[Guest]: what you wanted to say in the next draft, you began to polish a few arguments on the
[Guest]: third day, because you're thinking about it subconsciously, some minute qualifications
[Guest]: of the points we're trying to make began to occur to you, or a better version of what
[Guest]: you're trying to say, you're not even working anymore, it's just now dropping down from
[Guest]: the sky of your mind like raindrops. So you're staying with something for as long as it needs
[Guest]: to produce the best version of what you can do. And that I think is a writerly ideal that
[Guest]: is nice, you know, that you don't, we don't produce at maximum capacity. It's not the
[Guest]: Saudi Arabian oil barrels where you know, like, you know, more writing is perhaps even
[Guest]: in a material sense, more profit, spiritually and with regard to your relationship with
[Guest]: your work, it's not. And that way novels are very disciplining, because what you're after
[Guest]: is actually a language that you will never use again in your life. And to understand
[Guest]: that language you created to be to be to be shaped by what you already have done and to
[Guest]: work the next year by in the light of the insights you've got, it cannot do it on a
[Guest]: time schedule. And what you actually want is the deep immersion where you discover many
[Guest]: things that you would never have known on the first day of writing. That's why you know,
[Guest]: so many novelists end up rewriting the first two, three chapters of the book, because it's
[Guest]: trash, not just because it's, it was the start of their work. They just didn't know what
[Guest]: the chapters themselves led them to learn further down the line. So you rewrite your
[Guest]: early work in the light of what you're able to do further down. And once you do this,
[Guest]: and you realize what pleasure there is in it, you cannot return, or you can only return
[Guest]: under pressure for other reasons, you know, making money or etc to, in the end, you want
[Guest]: to be left alone for that three or four, sometimes a bit faster, that experience of doing something
[Guest]: which later when you read it, you won't realize how you could do it. You really can't really,
[Guest]: I don't mean this in a sense of awe at you know, like creation, it's just that you got
[Guest]: so involved with it. I cannot write Arzir Dwarf again today, even if I know the story
[Guest]: because I cannot write like that. I could only write in that at the time in the light
[Guest]: of what I knew. Those were good decisions I made then. And even the fact that it wasn't
[Guest]: such a good writer, perhaps, or I had real flaws, and I could only write in certain ways,
[Guest]: I could use my own constraints and limitations to create more deeply in certain spheres,
[Guest]: you know, like you were saying, disciplines and constraints can be a way of unlocking
[Guest]: some things. In that sense, I think novels are good for writing, you know, you completely
[Guest]: abandon this idea, you descend from it, from the very root that you know, that, you know,
[Guest]: if I never wrote a novel in my life, I don't think that many readers in Indian literature
[Guest]: frankly would miss me. I would miss myself. And I would miss my writing. And I know that
[Guest]: there are many things that are waiting for me that I can only do by writing novels, including
[Guest]: some understandings about how language works, or how human beings work. So it's actually
[Guest]: a way for me to go forward in my own life. And afterwards, of course, it's nice to be
[Guest]: read. And I do want, I don't want to just write and not publish. But my readership is
[Guest]: frankly not such a big, not a big deal in my life and nor is my productivity level.
[Guest]: It's something a little more private than that. I want to see a book that I can stand
[Guest]: up on my shelf, alongside the books that I admire and respect. It should be able to like,
[Guest]: like Biputi Bhushan Bandopadhyay's book standing next to my book should be able to, if they're
[Guest]: if they're able to talk to each other when I'm away traveling, I think that is, if they
[Guest]: don't look down on one another, I think that that is a sort of thing that I would give
[Guest]: me pleasure.
[Amit Varma]: Where do you think they fall short now?
[Amit Varma]: My writing?
[Amit Varma]: Like, why can't your current books stand on the same bookshelf and have those conversations?
[Guest]: In that sense, actually, I mean, perhaps I'm overestimating myself, but I don't feel the
[Guest]: fall short. If they fall short, then I don't let them out. You know, I've reworked some
[Guest]: books of mine endlessly. That's what Cloud took six or seven years to write. And I just
[Guest]: was not pleased with what it was. And somebody would say it looks fine enough. Let's bring
[Guest]: it out. And I would say no, until I can read it for pleasure myself. And even be surprised
[Guest]: by my own writing, I've done it myself. I can't let it go. And that's the model I followed.
[Guest]: And it has meant only three books in 15 years. But they stand up on my shelf and I'm happy
[Amit Varma]: with them.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, in my question earlier about, you know, that production perfection dilemma,
[Amit Varma]: I actually agree with you. I mean, I think both models are fine. I think for a certain
[Amit Varma]: kind of creator, number one, you get to excellence by iterating constantly. So you got to just
[Amit Varma]: keep the production on. And number two, it takes a long time to build sort of an organic
[Amit Varma]: following for your work. So if you are, for example, dependent on outside things like
[Amit Varma]: validation, you will simply never produce enough. So you have to love what you're doing.
[Amit Varma]: And then you have to just do it again and again. And then eventually good things happen.
[Amit Varma]: But for a novel, I understand why the immersive experience is more useful, where you kind
[Amit Varma]: of don't do a quantitative analysis of, you know, John Grisham once said that to be a
[Amit Varma]: successful writer, you have to have the work ethic of an accountant. And I agree with him.
[Amit Varma]: Yes, I agree with him, you do. But at the same time, not in the sense that someone in
[Amit Varma]: the creator economy might be how many videos have I released this week? Yes, I get that.
[Amit Varma]: And therein lies that other question of where does gratification lie? Because for a create,
[Amit Varma]: like if you're making YouTube videos, or you're writing newsletter posts, or you're even doing
[Amit Varma]: podcasts like this, you have that sense that if I keep doing it again and again, over a
[Amit Varma]: period of time, organically growth will happen. I have an episode out every week, people will
[Amit Varma]: discover some episode or the other, they'll binge on whatever came before. And that's
[Amit Varma]: organically how growth happens for creators in all kinds of fields. But for a novelist,
[Amit Varma]: it must feel lonely that you write a book, you bring it out. And initially, when you're
[Amit Varma]: young, you think your first book and all of that. And then you kind of realize that nobody
[Amit Varma]: really gives a fuck. The world is going on. You know, the trains that you watch are still
[Amit Varma]: going east to west, west to east, nothing has stopped. Right? Then there is a question
[Amit Varma]: of what has this novel done? Is it then as much for this personal growth and gratification
[Amit Varma]: or whatever? Is this something that kind of bothers you? Because when you write your book
[Amit Varma]: reviews, and you really should start a newsletter, because I think people like me especially
[Amit Varma]: would love to read something like that, even if it's not formal essays or whatever, but
[Amit Varma]: just your thoughts on books or personal brief writing. We'll talk about this after this
[Amit Varma]: episode, I must convince you. But you know, stuff like that has a sort of an immediate
[Amit Varma]: impact in the world, which is measurable, and it's there and it's out there. And you
[Amit Varma]: do it, you put it out, you move on to the next thing. Is it harder with a novel?
[Guest]: Yes, but it is harder not because and I think many novelists feel this. It's not our fault
[Guest]: that it's harder because in the last 20 years, the centre of the cultural world has shifted
[Guest]: dramatically away from language towards the moving image and towards other forms of storytelling,
[Guest]: including and there are very good examples of this, what Facebook posts and Instagram
[Guest]: messages which satisfies our need for story. As Mario Vargas Llosa very acutely put it,
[Guest]: the human need for story is universal, but the form in which we get our stories keeps
[Guest]: changing. And for 100, 150 years, novels held for literate and educated people, novels held
[Guest]: the centre and we grew up in that culture and that I'm no doubt that that's what influenced
[Guest]: my desire to write books like that. One can accept that the world is changing so fast
[Guest]: that you know, you can like with so many other artisans, you know, you begin in a trade in
[Guest]: five or 10 years, you are either marginal or have been moved to one side. And you can
[Guest]: either change to adapt and do something else in storytelling, write for film, etc, etc.
[Guest]: Or you can keep going thinking that, you know, in my, I've always had a journalistic life
[Guest]: at 30-40 pieces a year. So that also makes me allows me to focus on other things and
[Guest]: have the gratification of readership in different places, the Wall Street Journal, Indian newspaper,
[Guest]: Mint, wherever it is, a travel magazine. So it's all fine. And in the end, the more you
[Guest]: worry about the larger shape of the culture, the more you become dependent, I almost call
[Guest]: it the tyranny of the audience, you know, people want this, people are doing this, that's
[Guest]: why I will go in that direction. And it's, on the one hand, it's very pragmatic. On the
[Guest]: other hand, you kind of feel, you know, if you are wedded to an art form, what is the
[Guest]: chance that you will be able to start up in another thing, you know, there's some things
[Guest]: that come from deep knowledge or things that have been part of your blood, you're thinking
[Guest]: for 25-30 years, can you just make the jump? Perhaps you can, but you'll be a lower grade
[Guest]: of worker in another, in a parallel art. And somewhere I feel, you know, although in some
[Guest]: other way, I'm drifting away from novels myself, I also want to write other kinds of nonfiction
[Guest]: books now. In the end, my heart and my, even if I don't write novels, I would still write
[Guest]: nonfiction books in a novelistic way. And I might even say that, rather than write a
[Guest]: weekly newsletter and get more readers, I would prefer to give those four hours to a
[Guest]: conversation of the kind that we are having now with someone I know whom I want to know
[Guest]: better. And I would prefer to create and be created in tandem with human beings than to
[Guest]: work at the level of books and of people reading.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and you mentioned, you mentioned the phrase tyranny of the audience. But isn't
[Amit Varma]: that something that novelists have always kind of stayed away from? Like, I understand
[Amit Varma]: it might be the imperative of a publisher or an editor to try and shape your book in
[Amit Varma]: a particular way. But all successful novelists, in a sense, have kind of stayed away from
[Amit Varma]: the tyranny of the audience and done what the hell they want and led the way. Like,
[Amit Varma]: if I see a problem in mainstream cinema today, and I think mainstreams, of course, are crumbling
[Amit Varma]: in every field. But if you look at mainstream cinema today, the truth is the exciting work,
[Amit Varma]: a lot of the exciting work is really happening away from the big studios. Like, I think there's
[Amit Varma]: a lot of rich world cinema happening today. But if you look at the big studios, it's just
[Amit Varma]: lack of imagination. It is, oh, let us build a Marvel franchise and this franchise and
[Amit Varma]: that. And that's always been a problem of the mainstream that what works yesterday,
[Amit Varma]: we'll try to create something like it tomorrow. Whereas the whole, you know, every good novelist
[Amit Varma]: will ignore what happened yesterday and just go where they want to go. And if it works,
[Amit Varma]: it works, and so on and so forth. So has the audience ever tyrannized you in that mental
[Guest]: sense?
[Guest]: No. Of course, I think it's a bit upsetting for me that I don't sell huge amounts of copies.
[Guest]: And now you know, I've gotten used to it. And it's never tyrannized me. But I've realized
[Guest]: that you know, the novel is marginal in India for many reasons. One that we are not historically
[Guest]: a novel reading culture. So you know, anyway, novels are minority pursued in a culture even
[Guest]: in the West. And in India, many people you know, there's the classic question at dinner
[Guest]: party in Bombay, Delhi, everywhere, somebody comes and asks you, so what do you do? Okay,
[Guest]: I write novels, or you write novels, fiction and nonfiction, a category mistake in the
[Guest]: very beginning, you know, people want stories, but they don't make this conceptual difference
[Guest]: in the head a novel or a story, you can write a novel about something that really happened
[Guest]: to you, you can write a book that you write about somebody else who's a real person could
[Guest]: also somehow be a novel. In their mind, there isn't this conceptual partition. And it makes
[Guest]: them a certain kind of reader. But obviously, it makes them blind to the fact that novels
[Guest]: are particular kind of literary artifact, written with the greatest attention to story
[Guest]: theme, everything's under close control, it's very carefully, you know, threaded out the
[Guest]: way the episodes are structured. So in the end, I think you have to accept your fate,
[Guest]: you know, you can't control your place in the larger and there's many accidents also,
[Guest]: you know, you could write a novel about something that suddenly everybody's reading. And that's
[Guest]: lucky for some unlucky fathers, etc. But in the main, I think, you know, I addressed this
[Guest]: theme in an essay in this book, the Indian novel as an agent of history, Indian novels
[Guest]: from the last hundred years, you know, we're very, very progressive in many things that
[Guest]: were not happening in Indian society. Indian novelists of the time began to enact stories
[Guest]: about gender revolutions, political revolutions, one step ahead of society, because the novel
[Guest]: gives you that room, you can say things in a story that you can't do in real life. But
[Guest]: because not a lot of people read them, the capacity of some great Indian writers as thinkers,
[Guest]: as political thinkers, except that they worked in the novel form meant that nobody really
[Guest]: knew what a Gopinath Mahanty said, or Bivuti Bhushan Bandopadhyay's model of human relations
[Guest]: adapted to the world of Indian democracy, or Yashpal's idea of man and woman in the
[Guest]: new Indian Republic, you know, all of these are thoughts that come out in novels like
[Guest]: Jhoota Sach or Pather Panchali, but they didn't have a huge traction and they don't have a
[Guest]: common, that's why I feel Indian newspapers and novels have, you know, broken up with
[Guest]: each other. So these ideas are not circulated and reviews are only about this character
[Guest]: I liked, or the book is too slow, etc, etc. There isn't that educated conversation about
[Guest]: what novels bring in the realm of ideas through storytelling. A story is also a particular
[Guest]: way of releasing an idea. And sometimes a much more realistic way of releasing an idea
[Guest]: because you show it passing through the world of human beings in space and time. It's not
[Guest]: an abstract idea, it's a political theory. So you cannot counter the biases of the culture
[Guest]: at all these levels. Sure, I can write book reviews, I can write novels, in my novels
[Guest]: there can be secrets, but until a reader opens the book, you know, I go to give a talk at
[Guest]: libraries sometimes, every book is dead until the reader opens it. And a certain kind of
[Guest]: reader perhaps opens my book. When I wrote Days of My China Dragon, in the beginning
[Guest]: nobody read it. These days, restauranteurs read it and write about it saying this really
[Guest]: reminded me of my life behind the gala. So, you know, you never know what destiny a book
[Guest]: has. Many books become alive 20-25 years after they've been written. So if you write enough
[Guest]: books over 50 years, in the end I think you've put in a solid shift and in the meantime you
[Guest]: should live your life and enjoy your afternoon naps, drink your morning coffees. You presented
[Guest]: me with an amazing coffee this time, one of the best I've had this month. So look, turn
[Guest]: away from these conflicts. For now, don't get too caught up in this. In middle age,
[Guest]: you know, live for other things. I live for my friends, my daughter, for football, a very
[Guest]: big part of my life, for social encounters, for travel. Once you finish your day's work,
[Amit Varma]: turn off the tap and forget all about it, is my thinking.
[Amit Varma]: Like a true novelist, you brought two contradictory thoughts together, that of an afternoon nap
[Amit Varma]: and a morning cup of coffee, because now you had this coffee, how are you going to have
[Guest]: a nap?
[Guest]: I can't sleep very well after morning cups of coffee, but if I drink coffee at six, I
[Guest]: can't sleep at night. Who knows what these mysteries mean?
[Amit Varma]: Who knows what these mysteries are? And I'm just kind of thinking aloud here, that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, I also did an episode with the publisher VK Kartika a couple of years ago, episode
[Amit Varma]: I enjoyed a lot, episode 150, in fact, I think it was, and one of the things she said was
[Amit Varma]: that people are not reading less. People are pretty much reading as much as they ever were.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that this whole notion of not enough people are reading is something that's
[Amit Varma]: been there in every generation. And I think what happens is that there's a small percentage
[Amit Varma]: of people in every generation who read, and the same percentage is reading even today.
[Amit Varma]: So that is not lost, except that the rest of the people are also expressing themselves
[Amit Varma]: all over the place. So you imagine that more people are not actually reading books. But
[Amit Varma]: the number of readers is pretty much the same. And therefore, and in an Indian context, it
[Amit Varma]: could be said that, you know, like in an essay Sara Rai wrote about her grandfather Premchand,
[Amit Varma]: she mentioned how he went to some random event somewhere where he was, it was not a book
[Amit Varma]: event, he just, I forget the exact thing, but crowds had piled up to see him, you know,
[Amit Varma]: especially in the languages, people still care deeply about reading and the whole culture
[Amit Varma]: is still there. So you know, even if it's always a small minority of people who read,
[Amit Varma]: it's kind of always been like that. So maybe that culture is there, but you could also
[Amit Varma]: be right that English writing in India may not have an organic audience like that.
[Guest]: Yes, and that audience itself may be drifting more towards nonfiction now than novels for
[Guest]: this. And so there can always be these micro trends under the broad trend. When somebody
[Guest]: says not enough people are reading, I take that in translation as meaning not enough
[Guest]: people are reading the sort of books that I think that should be read, which can be
[Guest]: real on or has both an element of genuine, has a substantive element to it plus a kind
[Guest]: of bias as well. So since I am to also a great extent looking on a library, I know you like
[Guest]: rate novels so highly, we kind of feel okay, but these are such beautiful, amazing books,
[Guest]: why don't more people read that rather than reading the latest, you know. But yeah, I
[Guest]: think we read more than used to. On your phone, you can read in a five minute space while
[Guest]: waiting for the train, you can read two, three articles, where did you do that before? So
[Guest]: we probably consume a lot more words. But the best kind of words, the sentences are
[Guest]: written to be remembered, you know, that level of writing, that requires real focus and dedication
[Guest]: to make the journey all the way there. It can't be something that randomly floats across
[Guest]: your brain. You want that encounter that well, who knows, we'll find out.
[Amit Varma]: I think Jonathan Haidt once made the great point that even though we have all of literature
[Amit Varma]: and everything available to us at a keystroke, which you know, when you and I were growing
[Amit Varma]: up, we did. But even though we have all of that available at a keystroke now, most people
[Amit Varma]: today are reading something that was produced in the last three days. So it's very fleeting.
[Amit Varma]: It's temporary. And often it is short catering to the sort of the short attention span. But
[Amit Varma]: I guess people who want to read, sometimes even they can't even act on the impulses if
[Amit Varma]: they want to read because the brain's been colonized by this constant need for dopamine
[Guest]: that social media gives you and all of this gives you.
[Guest]: But in the end, let's not, perhaps there's some unfortunate aspects of this, but let's
[Guest]: not still forget that there's hundreds of thousands of very sophisticated readers out
[Guest]: there in India. They might not all read the same books, but when you line them up and
[Guest]: line the libraries up, it's a fantastic world.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me something else. Last year, I was on the jury of this literature prize, the JCB
[Amit Varma]: Literature Prize, and reading through the vast number of books that we went through,
[Amit Varma]: you know, all of us realized that the quality of entries that were coming in were incredibly
[Amit Varma]: low. We managed to get a good long list out. I'm happy with all the books in the long list
[Amit Varma]: and the short list, just great books, a privilege to be able to read them as part of work. But
[Amit Varma]: the quality was incredibly low. And in some cases, you wondered that what are these publishing
[Amit Varma]: houses doing? All the big name publishing houses came out with books which screamed
[Amit Varma]: no editor, no editor, you know. So what's the scene here? Is that first of all, like,
[Amit Varma]: was it an outlier here? Or perhaps is my judgment, you know, somehow wrong in this? Because however
[Amit Varma]: much I read, I read selectively, I read books I want to read books I have heard about. So
[Amit Varma]: I am in a sense reading the cream of the crop already just by selection bias, to start with.
[Unknown]: But how rich is our ecosystem, so to say?
[Guest]: It's rich. I think as from the combined perspective of a former book reviewer, still current in
[Guest]: some way, perhaps a lesser intensity and a novelist, I would say, from my point of view,
[Guest]: the average Indian novel, especially in English, is incredibly banal. The very good Indian
[Guest]: novel is very, very good. And so there's a, it's not a ladder with like the rungs, you
[Guest]: know, there's huge gaps between them. And so in the end, you end up with lots of mediocre
[Guest]: material and out of that, some really wonderful books. And if you can imagine any literary
[Guest]: culture, if you can find 10 novels in the year that are really worth reading, you know,
[Guest]: the standard for a good novel is so high that in the end, as I've written in many reviews
[Guest]: of mine, most novels are bound to fail by the highest standards. No matter how hard
[Guest]: you work, how much time you put in, it doesn't quite cut it at the level of, you know, think
[Guest]: of a great, great novel, brilliance of language, intensity of character, depth of understanding
[Guest]: of human nature, ability to realise narrative effects, to construct, to keep the tempo going,
[Guest]: you know, to present reversals, to change point of view. It's not a small toolbox to
[Guest]: have, you know, so in the end, many novelists end up with two or three strengths that they
[Guest]: kind of play to and the rest they try and cover up or move away from. You can also see
[Guest]: people's weaknesses as you read and that's why they write, you know, a lot of Indian
[Guest]: novels tend to be monologic rather than dialogic. The characters don't talk a lot to one another,
[Guest]: the narrator explains lots of things about them and judges them in all sorts of ways
[Guest]: and makes interpretations about what sort of society they are, the satirical novel or
[Guest]: the ironical novel. In the end, I feel very impatient with many of these forms because
[Guest]: in the end, the writer is so much more powerful than the characters, I feel they're not respecting
[Guest]: the characters enough. There are depths to your own characters which you're not picking
[Guest]: out because they're so keen to explain who they are. I prefer a lighter touch on novelistic
[Guest]: material, where there are some mysteries which you also throw up your hands and say, like,
[Guest]: I'm not going to explain this. This is just how people are, this is how the reader must
[Guest]: make up their minds. So in the end, any judge, you would come up with these ideas and maybe
[Guest]: there would be, I have my biases, everybody else would. But I think your experience is
[Guest]: broadly true and there's nothing too disturbing or disconcerting about it. If you can produce
[Guest]: 10 good novels a year from across the languages, I'm only perhaps a little worried that in
[Guest]: the end, it doesn't seem to do a huge amount even for the sales of these books. Somehow
[Guest]: there's the gap between the prize and the readership still remains. Perhaps the prize
[Guest]: winning book might still have a lot more readers. But there is a gap of interpretation, explanation
[Guest]: where there's not a middle space where novels appear in the public world of Indian culture.
[Guest]: Like I said, again, the book review and the newspaper is the place where if somebody on
[Guest]: the op-ed page of a newspaper debated a novelist's vision of India, that would be a place where
[Guest]: the novel has escaped its normal categories to enter the mainstream. For some reason,
[Guest]: even newspaper editors are very, not at all keen to put books on any space. Even books
[Guest]: pages now become more about interviews with writers than a consideration of the, so you
[Guest]: know, how can you in such a space present the deepest meanings that a very deep form
[Guest]: can, it's become a cult of the cognoscenti and the connoisseur. Those who really love
[Guest]: it can talk about it day and night, but you can't find any trace of it. It's like a ghost
[Amit Varma]: in the culture.
[Amit Varma]: And I think there's also a chicken and egg here. An editor of a newspaper might well
[Amit Varma]: say that, hey, I can give three books pages, but there aren't enough good writers at that
[Amit Varma]: level. And the other part of it is that if you don't have those pages to begin with,
[Guest]: they can never be good writers at that level because there's an ecosystem.
[Guest]: So that's where I feel the certain newspapers and certain media houses have destroyed some
[Guest]: aspects of Indian culture. And I almost feel when I come back to Bombay and I don't live
[Guest]: here, I meet some people who actually, I wouldn't call them anything else. There are times of
[Guest]: India mind. The main preoccupations are cricket, politics, Bollywood and the stock market.
[Guest]: And for them, there's nothing greater to art than that. And what works in the market is
[Guest]: what is art is and on classical music, on Indian painting, there'll be almost nothing
[Guest]: to say. They don't even think these are legitimate points of view, unless you're making money
[Amit Varma]: from it when it does become legitimate. Yeah. And I guess my earlier lament actually
[Amit Varma]: just falls into place with Sturgeon's law, which is Sturgeon's law is 98% of everything
[Amit Varma]: is scrap. So that applies to everything, including books, except that I was forced to read.
[Guest]: Just to interrupt in those 10 books that you would have picked, you would have found a
[Guest]: great internal diversity of thought, tone, manner. And that, I think that diversity in
[Guest]: Indian novels is really something to you realize there's so much granular detail that these
[Guest]: people are picking up, which when it gets into your mind, you see the world differently
[Amit Varma]: from then on. Yeah, absolutely. I mean, some of it is stunning.
[Amit Varma]: A couple of the really good books on the shortlist, which didn't happen to win because it was
[Amit Varma]: a good shortlist, were actually rejected by many publishers before they got published.
[Amit Varma]: And I was I was kind of shocked by that. Because given the kind of crap they publish, otherwise,
[Amit Varma]: to think that two such good books would not just even be...
[Guest]: The sales or marketing team would have said we can't sell this. So that's what that was
[Guest]: perhaps the main reason why, you know, a lot of mediocre novels can still push 2000 copies
[Guest]: of this and then it's a purely in some way an economic, you know, you can't blame the
[Guest]: publisher, they are putting capital into it. You can't blame them, but you can't forgive
[Amit Varma]: them either. I think what I find in all other fields is
[Unknown]: that because the mainstream is dying, because it's getting dispersed, that artists no longer
[Amit Varma]: need to rely on these platforms or these intermediaries to reach their audiences. But that is not
[Amit Varma]: the case with novels. And I wonder how it could possibly be the case with novels even,
[Amit Varma]: you know, because with every other form, there is a constant dialogue happening between creators
[Amit Varma]: and audiences, and they're discovering the niches. And it's a process that takes a lot
[Amit Varma]: of time, but a novel almost seems like, you know, as quaint as a test match.
[Guest]: It's such a difficult and persnickety personality, it won't even do the things that will help
[Amit Varma]: itself to grow in the world. So let's kind of get back to the chronological
[Amit Varma]: journey of your life as a reviewer. But before that, question about how did this dialogue
[Amit Varma]: between writing novels and reviewing them, how did these influence each other? Like,
[Amit Varma]: I would imagine that if once you once you have reviewed many, many books, you read them
[Amit Varma]: in a different way with a different kind of attention to craft and detail. And that can
[Amit Varma]: influence the way you write. Yes. And at the same time, when you write, you might then
[Amit Varma]: be aware of certain aspects of actually what practitioners go through, which you might
[Amit Varma]: have missed as a reviewer had you not written yourself.
[Guest]: Yes, I think book reviews are great training in becoming a writer because, as I said, if
[Guest]: you're really going to take it seriously, you end up copying out a lot of sentences
[Guest]: to for use later. And to select as a little garden of sentences from the book. And when
[Guest]: you copy out sentences, I always tell my writing students, the eye works so much faster than
[Guest]: the hand that when you read a sentence, you might notice some things about it. When you
[Guest]: write it out so much more slowly, you suddenly realize if you aren't looking at that page
[Guest]: as you're copying it out, you put a comma in the wrong place or you you miss out a couple
[Guest]: of words, you realize actually there's an architecture of the sentence and the construction
[Guest]: that is not immediately perceptible that you only work out when you write it out again.
[Guest]: And that is very good training because then you are writing, making somebody else's sentences
[Guest]: your own and also learning things about rhythm, pacing, pausing, what kinds of information
[Guest]: to put ahead and before, how to load up a paragraph, an opening sentence, a closing
[Guest]: sentence. All these things become really palpable to you. And when you do that, then it doesn't
[Guest]: mean that you instantly become a better writer, but you become a better reader of your own
[Guest]: writing. And once you can become a better reader of your own writing, it means that
[Guest]: you're willing to work harder to make it even a touch better. Somebody else would say this
[Guest]: is perfectly publishable. You say no, no, no, no, no. I can't work out now, but give
[Guest]: me a couple of days. I'll solve this problem and bring it back to you. And then you are
[Guest]: really like, you know, what I really love about the world, you know, these biographies
[Guest]: of the Indian classical musicians of old, those who never made any money, lived in poverty
[Guest]: all their life. You would still go to the house and they are still working on some,
[Guest]: you know, thing for three hours every day because that's just their life as it is. In
[Guest]: there, I think an artist must also be a craftsman of that kind. You know, other people may not
[Guest]: notice. You have to have a private ideal perfection. If it doesn't sound exactly right, keep on
[Guest]: tinkering away till it pleases you. When you hear that sweet sound, you know, now I can
[Guest]: have my dinner or I can have my nap. This was worth working for. And that way, it's
[Guest]: a good dialogue between, you know, writing is so, so big. It's an incredible thing about
[Guest]: books. Every writer uses the same language. If you're writing in English, the same resources,
[Guest]: the same dictionary, the same vocabulary, the same stock of words, but no writer sounds
[Guest]: like each other. Even when you try to copy somebody, you end up sounding a bit like yourself
[Guest]: and perhaps a bit like them as well. In the end, writing doesn't lie. You reveal who you
[Guest]: are and actually your work is to put more and more of your real self into you. You construct
[Guest]: a writing self at the beginning. So you write from a narrower bit of yourself. The older
[Guest]: you grow, I find as a writer, the more and more you can put who you are, transpose yourself
[Guest]: onto the page and write with the full sense of your force, all the muscles of your soul
[Guest]: you put into a sentence. And then it's pleasurable. And sometimes it means you can write too fast
[Guest]: because you're so confident of what you're doing. You still have to stop yourself from
[Guest]: getting tricked by your own confidence. But all these aspects of creativity and craftsmanship,
[Guest]: I think, even in words, they make life worth living.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And this mindfulness to detail this attention, like I'm reminded of one of my
[Amit Varma]: favorite short stories is Alice Munro's The Bear Came Over the Mountain, which first came
[Amit Varma]: in the New Yorker. And I remember once looking at the version in the New Yorker and the version
[Amit Varma]: that came out in the book that she did. And they are almost identical, except for a punctuation
[Amit Varma]: mark in the last paragraph. And you realize and I don't remember whether it was a comma
[Amit Varma]: or what it was. But reading those two versions, I suddenly realized that yeah, man, the whoever
[Amit Varma]: the New Yorker editor was, he kind of screwed it up. She meant it this way. Right? And it's
[Amit Varma]: just such have you read the story?
[Guest]: I haven't read the story, but I can completely understand what you're saying down to the
[Guest]: very magazine, because one of the problems of the very famous magazines as the editors
[Guest]: take over your style to align it with the magazine style, a great crime I find in writing.
[Guest]: And one of my problems with reading fiction, the New Yorker, the stories read not too much
[Guest]: like each other, not in the sense of the material, but in the sense of the way they are written.
[Guest]: And therefore, Alice Munro totally has my thumbs up for taking this out. This vicious
[Guest]: comma that, you know, takes you away from your own writing.
[Amit Varma]: And it's such a minor thing. I don't think anyone except someone as anal as me would
[Guest]: notice.
[Guest]: Well spotted. No, it's not anal. It's dedication and love of literature in the sense that any
[Guest]: small thing in, you know, what is the difference between words in life and words in literature?
[Guest]: In literature, ideally you want every word to be meant and to be intended and to be in
[Guest]: control of things. So every single mark in literature is also meant. So if it can be
[Guest]: un-meant or better-meant, that should also be part of your work.
[Amit Varma]: So on this note, let me bring up this email exchange that you reproduced in your book
[Amit Varma]: that you had with Robert McCrum, who was a famous books editor at The Guardian, right?
[Amit Varma]: And you sent him an email first, and the subject is modestly, because he had messed with the
[Amit Varma]: word modestly. And your email goes, Hi, Robert, modestly, the whole point of the piece, I
[Amit Varma]: think, was that the book was modestly good. With that word cut out of the last sentence,
[Amit Varma]: it felt as if I'd overpriced it. So basically, you'd said the book was modestly good.
[Guest]: He modestly said this book was good.
[Amit Varma]: And you were complaining that it felt like I overpriced it. Mr. McCrum's reply to you
[Amit Varma]: was, quote, No, with the word cut out, you made your point well, and not too pompously.
[Amit Varma]: As published, it was a good review. Thank you. Stop quote. And I want to kind of dial
[Amit Varma]: down a little bit on that pompously bit, right? Because what a book reviewer is essentially
[Amit Varma]: doing is standing in judgment, standing in judgment over a book, an endeavor, and so
[Amit Varma]: on and so forth. And, you know, with a greater amount of self protection than I had back
[Amit Varma]: in the day, today, I'd feel a little, I'd be very wary of that, of taking it too far
[Amit Varma]: of the pompousness as it were. Is that a challenge that you have faced? Like when you look back
[Amit Varma]: on your younger self? Do you sometimes think that there was too much certainty sometimes
[Amit Varma]: that you was, you know, that you might have gone overboard somewhere?
[Guest]: Well, I'm trying to analyze myself. And, you know, I could have a positive bias towards
[Guest]: my past, even in this one instance, I put it on as a both as a sense of the comedy of
[Guest]: the correspondence of book reviewing, which nobody ever writes for, which is fun to read,
[Guest]: you know, that you can debate a single word, but also about, you know, this whole thing
[Guest]: that, you know, every single word matters. And you can have a discussion about that.
[Guest]: But finally, I would even say what he would think of as pompously, I would reinterpret
[Guest]: as passionately. You're too passionate sometimes. You're so caught up with the book that you
[Guest]: feel like when it's very good, you overpraise it. And when it's, you don't like it, you
[Guest]: almost find you're too strong in your judgment. But actually what it speaks to deep down is
[Guest]: a real love of, you think that books are so important that they should not be taken lightly
[Guest]: at all. It doesn't matter whether it's modestly good or good. It does matter is how you think
[Guest]: of yourself. And obviously, when you take that opinion out, an older person will gently
[Guest]: put you in your place. I thought it was quite graceful the way he did it. He wasn't exactly
[Guest]: saying that you're being pompous, only that that word perhaps was, or he might even have
[Guest]: been saying, you know, Englishmen really love to, one of the things about English prose
[Guest]: is often, you know, many things are left unsaid. He might even have been saying you are not
[Guest]: being pompous, but it comes across as being so. Therefore, I'm helping you by taking out
[Guest]: the one word in there that actually makes, understates your case for yourself. I'm leaving
[Guest]: the best of you on the page. There could be all these, I've never, you know, riffing now,
[Guest]: but it was a good exchange. And I was so grateful for these unknown, once in a while, I used
[Guest]: to work out the money to go to England. And actually, books, editor is so important in
[Guest]: your life as a source of work, you almost feel you have to make a courtesy call, like
[Guest]: we do in India on Diwali, take a box of sweets, take something to show your face that they
[Guest]: remember later when the book comes in, he should remember you or she. And I'm so grateful
[Guest]: for these people, you know, because without those little bits of help from here, there,
[Guest]: the pleasure of seeing my work out and, you know, I could be very poor earning 12, 15,000
[Guest]: a month, but I know I'm being published in three continents in the world. Chalo, no problem.
[Guest]: This is sweet enough for life in literature. And really, you know, I feel very grateful
[Guest]: to these folk who God knows, you know, hundreds of people must have been writing to them.
[Amit Varma]: So many reviews coming in, imagine the life of a book review editor. In the 1990s, I used
[Amit Varma]: to be this magazine lasted for a lot longer, but I wrote for them in the 1990s called Rock
[Amit Varma]: Street Journal. Yes, I am, in fact, the only writer in the world to have written both for
[Amit Varma]: the Wall Street Journal and the Rock Street Journal. So a signal achievement. So I remember
[Amit Varma]: at one point, there was somewhere in the mid 90s, there was a Prince album, which had come
[Amit Varma]: out, I think it might have been Emancipation. It was a big album, triple album or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And I loved it. So I wrote a five star review. And I went into it in great detail. And then
[Amit Varma]: there was the magazine had the custom of giving a star rating. So I gave it five. And when
[Amit Varma]: they published it, they published my review exactly as it was, but they put three stars
[Amit Varma]: instead of five. And I was like, this makes no sense, because my words are going one way,
[Amit Varma]: you're going the other way. Yes. And the editor at the time, the late Amit Sehgal, fantastic
[Amit Varma]: guy, sadly died in a boating accident, I think. He said, No, no, we just felt that five is
[Amit Varma]: too much for an album like this. You know, let's come to sort of another interesting
[Amit Varma]: aspect, because what is happening is on the one hand, you have started freelancing for
[Amit Varma]: foreign newspapers as you're writing reviews, they're paying $150, $180, $300 princely sums
[Amit Varma]: of money for young people like us at that time. And on the other hand, you also got
[Amit Varma]: this gig at Mint. Yeah, when you know, Mint started, they had books pages. And Priya Ramani
[Amit Varma]: was excellent editor there. And she gave you a gig, but you were getting only 15k a month
[Guest]: for writing weekly reviews. So it was a lot of money. Perhaps not in an objective sense,
[Guest]: but relative to payment at the time, it was a lot of money for several reasons. One, since
[Guest]: you only got paid in India, 1500-2000 to begin with is already an upgrade on that something
[Amit Varma]: double of that per piece. So people would actually give you 1500-2000 per piece. Yes.
[Guest]: And even now, that's what you get for many Indian newspapers. Those rates have not gone
[Guest]: up. And two, it was secure income, because you knew that we 15,000 every month. So at
[Guest]: least you knew that, you know, you could count on it. And three, it went to work every week.
[Guest]: So you didn't have to hustle all the time keeping on writing to folks. So you saved
[Guest]: on some labor. And four, I felt at the time that some readers would notice you every week
[Guest]: and begin to like what you would do with your blog, you know, fall in tune with the idea
[Guest]: that there's a consistent sensibility interpreting all manner of books from biography to religion
[Guest]: to and also it was an intellectual exercise for me. So in all these ways, that was the
[Guest]: wealth creation of that. You know, I think life is about learning finally to see both
[Guest]: learning how to make wealth, and also learning how to see wealth in many things which are
[Guest]: not conventionally thought of as meaning rich riches. And in this way, I somehow have always
[Guest]: had a kind of sixth sense that this could be very productive for me. And three or four
[Guest]: years of reviewing books every week was like my education, not in literature, but in Indian
[Guest]: literature. And I really enjoyed the chance to read Indian novels, Indian economists,
[Guest]: Indian biographers, Indian writers and politics. And it was fantastic. And when it was well
[Guest]: done, these people later would write to me and would become friends, I would go meet
[Guest]: them in different parts. There was a window to the, I'd never strategize it that way.
[Guest]: But we became, a conversation was set up as a good book review, you can always do in the
[Guest]: reader's mind as well, a conversation between the book and the other books you've read in
[Guest]: the past. And in all these ways, it was fantastic. And again, you know, like I say, I could go
[Guest]: to the Mint office in Dadar every week, and not only get the book that I was supposed
[Guest]: to review for the week, but all the other books that were not going to get reviewed
[Guest]: and would go to the Raddi, I would say, okay, shall I take these? And Priyad Sanjeev will
[Guest]: say, it's a space cleared off my table, I'd come back with 10-15. I felt so rich in my
[Guest]: shoulder bag full of stuff that has just come out, I don't have to pay for. So it was worth
[Guest]: it in so many ways. And, you know, when you are young, it's almost a mistake to make too
[Guest]: much money also. It makes you too dependent on the things that money can bring for you.
[Guest]: The restaurants, the bars, the goods, the iPhone, so whatever. I have some of these
[Guest]: now, but I didn't then and I think in the end, it was probably good for me.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and there's a notable passage again, from your book, which I'll read out, which
[Amit Varma]: is about exactly this, where you write, these small sums erratically forthcoming did very
[Amit Varma]: little for my worldly prospects, including my romantic ones. Had they constituted my
[Amit Varma]: salary at a newspaper or magazine, I would have been greatly despondent and resentful.
[Amit Varma]: And being the pearls of self-employment, they were worth much more than could be calculated
[Amit Varma]: by a narrowly economistic measure. They underwrote my freedom and independence, my sense of self-worth
[Amit Varma]: and vision, my mornings, wandering around on buses and trains, my afternoon naps. They
[Amit Varma]: protected me as much from indulgence in bars and restaurants and other sites of conspicuous
[Amit Varma]: consumption as they did from the horror, the deepest, most dispiriting note of my life
[Amit Varma]: for the two years that I worked for a cricket magazine, of being a drudge in an office,
[Amit Varma]: a servant of clock and contract. And they allowed me to sleep soundly at night, often
[Amit Varma]: after a long stint of reading, and to wake up late in the morning. Surely that was as
[Amit Varma]: much as one could reasonably ask from a trade and wage. Between the age of 25 to 30, when
[Amit Varma]: most young people seek to rise swiftly in worldly post and station, I never submitted
[Amit Varma]: my CV anywhere, making almost a fetish of my independence. I rarely left Bombay. I lived
[Amit Varma]: as frugally as possible." And you know, that conservative note that you strike here, that
[Guest]: I was protected from indulgence by my penury. You couldn't have put it better in five or
[Amit Varma]: seven words, yes. Almost seems to me like some kind of rationalization. Like even if
[Amit Varma]: you didn't go to a bar with the money, it would have been nice to have had money. I
[Guest]: couldn't have meant that money though. That's the whole thing. Yeah. So, and I must also
[Guest]: say I cheated a little bit because every now and then I was to drop by at your house or
[Guest]: Sonia's house and you have, like I said, that essay might not have actually been written,
[Guest]: but it can be written in two sentences. The drinking companions of my 20s, just put Amit
[Guest]: Varma, Sonia Filero and leave the end on that note. So, I did enjoy myself a lot too.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I'm not even much of a drinker, but I guess a drinking companion doesn't have
[Amit Varma]: to drink. It just has to be a companion while you drink. So, this comes to mind in the context
[Amit Varma]: of, and again, I'm conflicted about this, that there is this piece of advice that you
[Amit Varma]: believe in when you're young and which is often given to young people that follow your
[Amit Varma]: passions, do not compromise. But then I look around and as I grow older, I look around
[Amit Varma]: me and I find that most of the people who actually did this in their 20s and 30s are
[Amit Varma]: fucked now. They haven't gotten anywhere. The cafes of Varsavar are filled with strugglers
[Amit Varma]: who didn't make it and they are filled with resentment for all their peers who did their
[Amit Varma]: MBAs or whatever, have fancy jobs, fancy houses, fancy cars, and they're kind of screwed and
[Amit Varma]: they're kind of nowhere. So, I get both sides of that, of why, you know, to live a fulfilling
[Amit Varma]: life, you need to live a fulfilling life, doing something you love that you wake up
[Amit Varma]: every morning and you look forward to doing. But at the same time, you know, the money
[Amit Varma]: is also a factor in all of that, like at some point, and I have noted this down, but I can't
[Amit Varma]: find it in my notes, you have a wonderful sentence about how, you know, once you decided
[Amit Varma]: not to care about money and give your life to books, money suddenly became the most important
[Amit Varma]: thing because you have to put the next meal on the table or whatever.
[Guest]: Yes, I think I was right to book review editors in order of highest payment to lowest payment,
[Guest]: not in order of readership. But that was my hierarchy. Yes, you know, you're right. And
[Guest]: also sometimes you realize your passion and your ability can sometimes, especially when
[Guest]: you're young, you cannot read yourself so well. You may think that you're going to be
[Guest]: the greatest writer, singer ever. You find two or three years later that, you know, life
[Guest]: has taught you some cruel lessons about where you actually stand. And, you know, money is
[Guest]: important and it also, like I said, gives you self-respect, agency, freedom, power in
[Guest]: the world. Yeah, I think if one should be idealistic, though, one should do it in one's
[Guest]: 20s, because you can take more risks than with yourself and your personality can suffer
[Guest]: the blows of rejection and repression. And you can bounce off that and then just move
[Guest]: into some other place. It's harder when you're older. And then you also have to have the
[Guest]: discipline also, you know, to not become bitter as you grow older, because everybody feels
[Guest]: to a man that even those who are very successful feel that we weren't as successful as we should
[Guest]: have been. If somebody praises, and we know this culture in India today, they praise me,
[Guest]: but they don't praise me for the things that I really should be praised for. So, you know,
[Guest]: you can, there's never any end to that road. You've got to learn to make a peace with life
[Guest]: and find pleasure and, and fulfillment in so many other bits of life. You know, I think
[Guest]: the art of writing novels is also the art of saying novels are not the most important
[Guest]: thing in life. They can be very important for you, but beyond that people and life is
[Guest]: more important. Even novels tell you that.
[Amit Varma]: Even novels tell you that. Tell me about sort of the media landscape in India when it comes
[Amit Varma]: to being open to the kind of not just in terms of books, pages, but even cultural writing
[Amit Varma]: and so on. Because, you know, in the early 90s, it seemed like there might be hope when
[Unknown]: I think, you know, Vinod Mehta started Indian Post and Independent and they had their books
[Amit Varma]: pages and there was some action there, and so on and so forth. And even at the time Lounge
[Amit Varma]: started when Mint began and they started Lounge and there was a lot of that cultural coverage.
[Amit Varma]: But after that, you know, one doesn't see it these days. And of course, I don't see
[Amit Varma]: it these days because I don't even get any physical newspapers. But it's just not there.
[Amit Varma]: And you were the, you were a books editor at Caravan for a while where you were commissioning
[Amit Varma]: short stories, poetry, not commissioning, but publishing short stories and poetry and
[Amit Varma]: all of that. And trying to, I suppose, bring about and build an ecosystem, bring about
[Amit Varma]: a culture of stuff and all of that. What was that experience like? And how has your thinking
[Amit Varma]: evolved? And do you think that, that the media somehow made a mistake there? Because what
[Amit Varma]: the media will often do is that you will try to go as broad as possible and not deep enough
[Amit Varma]: into any one thing. But that is a mistake. Because the point is that if you go deep in
[Amit Varma]: a few places, there are all these niches, which in a country like India, even a new
[Amit Varma]: niche can be big in absolute numbers, which can be worthwhile to pursue further for its
[Amit Varma]: own sake. Not everything need be homogenized. So what's your sense of Indian media there?
[Amit Varma]: Do you think there's an opportunity lost? Do you think even today something like that
[Guest]: could do well?
[Guest]: Big time, a big time opportunity lost because, you know, in the end, this is the whole thing
[Guest]: about competition. Do you compete by trying to become like something else? Or do you compete
[Guest]: by finding a better path for yourself? And especially, you know, when you, you just,
[Guest]: if you were to take a walk down the street today, or just go to Andheri and take a train
[Guest]: to Churchgate and come back in the evening by randomly taking trains and buses, stopping
[Guest]: at bars, cafes, the immense range of language and thoughts we would hear just in a single
[Guest]: day would make you think if, if you had never read a newspaper in your life, you'd say,
[Guest]: from tomorrow, let's start a newspaper presenting all possible points of view, where you know,
[Guest]: both the politician and the person you randomly, you know, that way some Instagram handles
[Guest]: are really wonderful, humans of Bombay, etc, etc. Anybody's language and perspective on
[Guest]: life can be so great when you find it in a structured space. And why couldn't you present
[Guest]: a front page story, not about the latest revelation or the economy or whatever, but just transcribing
[Guest]: a union leader's speech in a protest march, word for word, they read the speech on the
[Guest]: page, and that is your topic, the nice photograph or whatever. So you get a sense of the clash
[Guest]: of voices in your society. There's so many, so many things you could do with a newspaper
[Guest]: in there. And of course, daily journalism is also a big grind. And you have to, there's
[Guest]: so many other imperatives, not having been in the business, I would hesitate to criticize,
[Guest]: because I would not understand some of the constraints, especially the financial ones,
[Guest]: which are huge. But in the end, you could say that those in charge really are not classic
[Guest]: newsmen or women of the old school, who love a well written, well produced, deep newspaper
[Guest]: as an intellectual artifact. You know, it can't perhaps be as the same quality as a
[Guest]: book. But it's a solid read from page to page that when you finish it, you could say, here's
[Guest]: a thing that puts other people in touch with society in a way that they couldn't without
[Guest]: the newspaper. Of which newspaper could you say that in India today in English? Perhaps
[Guest]: to a little extent, the Telegraph, I think it is quite well written, some bits of it
[Guest]: are. But in the end, it's all finally lowest common denominator, mostly run by like culture
[Guest]: is always Bollywood, film stars, or books that film stars write, or writers that film
[Guest]: stars endorse. You know, it's the path of lowest resistance. And immediately you think,
[Guest]: is that what an education is for? You know, the idea is like, surely we have greater resources
[Guest]: than this too. But in spaces like the Caravan, they became very niche then, although it's
[Guest]: written to even to this date, I think it's the best magazine to read in India on a monthly
[Guest]: basis. You know, that deep dive into profiles into long form stories is fantastic. And I
[Guest]: feel really, really proud of having worked for a little while, although right on the
[Guest]: edge, and they've shut down that section, itself a sign of how difficult it is to keep
[Guest]: it, keep something like that going. But for a while, it was a great project to be a part
[Guest]: of and have the highest respect for the people I've worked for. Many young writers in their
[Guest]: late 20s, fresh from journalism degrees came in, learned their ropes and now working elsewhere.
[Guest]: As a training school, as a theatre for different kinds of India. It was, you know, those profiles
[Guest]: of Indian politicians in the Caravan, Arun Jaitley, Modi, you can still read them today
[Guest]: as literature. They deserve to be put together in a book like the Caravan Book of Profiles
[Guest]: or whatever. And that's the model of journalism I subscribe to as my, you know, my motto,
[Guest]: you know, like, for journalism like that, I'm willing to even give up my books and work
[Guest]: every month, every week to like, be part of an ensemble. If something that could be put
[Guest]: together, I would be very happy to join it. And because being part of a team, and working
[Guest]: for a project bigger than yourself, in the end, there's few satisfactions in life that
[Guest]: are bigger than that. But if it can't be done, then you retreat into your private space and
[Guest]: make little interventions here and there, working across media. But I would definitely
[Guest]: say, you know, where is the great Indian newspaper today? We are a great nation, we are a nation
[Guest]: moving towards greatness. Our stories are completely off the charts in terms of rapture,
[Guest]: rigor, the new boundaries being broken. There's not a space that records it all, that you
[Guest]: can patch it together from looking at Instagram videos, YouTube channels, meeting folk, but
[Guest]: it would be great if it was in print.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I agree. And even Caravan has declined a lot in sort of recent times, but I completely
[Amit Varma]: get that sentiment. You know, we live in interesting times. And I wonder if this affects the way
[Amit Varma]: people view art as well. Like, for example, everything today in our discourse is really
[Amit Varma]: about narrative battles, right? And history has, of course, been weaponized to that service.
[Amit Varma]: But one thing that I find distressing, and that's, it's always, of course, been the case
[Amit Varma]: that a lens of politics has sometimes been thrown upon to, towards art, towards literature,
[Amit Varma]: towards cinema, to evaluate that. But I find that happening more and more today. Now the
[Amit Varma]: broader, like where art is looked upon almost as something functional, the way Kashmir Files
[Amit Varma]: is being praised, for example, and has become a part of, you know, what is a pitched political
[Amit Varma]: battle, where people aren't talking about, you know, looking at looking at the film just
[Amit Varma]: for its own merits, but there is just so much baggage that the film carries. While my sense
[Amit Varma]: has always been is that art and politics should just be separate, not just in the sense that
[Amit Varma]: you don't look at art through the prism of politics, but that the artist should keep
[Amit Varma]: his politics out of his art, to a fair extent. And, you know, as I think, you know, Kundera
[Amit Varma]: once wrote in an essay that, you know, then you run the risk of art becoming propaganda,
[Guest]: as it were. What's your sense? What's your sense of this?
[Guest]: Yes, there I don't agree, because you do run the risk of it becoming propaganda. But that's
[Guest]: it. You run the risk. It doesn't mean that it automatically lands up there. And also
[Guest]: you cannot divorce your politics from your art. You know, it depends at what level do
[Guest]: you translate your politics into your art. In some Indian writers I can see who also
[Guest]: write in nonfiction and when they write novels, their novelistic writing voice is basically
[Guest]: a transposition of their nonfiction writing voice into the narrator of the books. It's
[Guest]: so dull because there could be something interesting in the story, but in the end the controlling
[Guest]: figure is just the same from above. So it's not enough of a jump. But if, for instance,
[Guest]: you believe, as you know, that Indian society is very interesting because of the mix of
[Guest]: voices and that India deserves to be democratised more and more, every generation must carry
[Guest]: the work of deepening democracy at some level, no matter what work you do, you must throw
[Guest]: new voices into it. That is your politics at some level. If then your art emerges from
[Guest]: there, where is it? Where is the problem? I don't see any problem with that. There can
[Guest]: also be a way of both of expressing and of limiting your politics. When you know what
[Guest]: politics can do for art, that's the responsibility of the artist, not to take it too far, but
[Guest]: also that is the motivating force that makes you believe in human beings or that makes
[Guest]: you angry saying these people haven't got their due. So I'm all for politics and art,
[Guest]: but not in that sense of characters also becoming mouthpieces for opinions. Like I said, I wrote
[Guest]: an essay in a novel. I want in novels to actually dramatise the conflict between two points
[Guest]: of view rather than state my own. My truth can remain my truth, but not on the pages
[Guest]: of my fiction, because that's the space for a different kind of encounter. It must be
[Guest]: questioned by the opposite of whatever you're trying to say. And then that encounter becomes
[Guest]: interesting for readers. In Clouds, I think what I've done well, and I like reading it,
[Guest]: it's a conflict of opinions between two brahmanical old people and one young person who believes
[Guest]: in the religion of clouds. And they both don't understand each other in chapter one. And
[Guest]: by the end, they somewhat understand each other. At least they've asked each other some
[Guest]: questions. That for me was very, very interesting to do. It's clear that the writer thinks very
[Guest]: harshly of the older people, as some people are very, very close. But as the book progresses,
[Guest]: you get to like them more and more, because in the end, there's also something very unique
[Guest]: about human beings. They can be really terrible, but you spend a lot of time with them, you
[Guest]: find things that you like about them. And in the end, we can put aside our differences
[Guest]: and make cause on so many spheres with human beings, with whom we have been in conflict
[Guest]: in our life, politically, socially, familiarly. In the end, you kind of think, you know, we
[Guest]: must focus on these bits about, especially now in our darkish time, we have to construct
[Guest]: and align and link up in whatever way we can.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I agree with all of that. I mean, you know, our politics is baked into who we are
[Amit Varma]: and who we are is baked into what we write. But as long as it's about people, and as long
[Amit Varma]: as it's not too overt and whatever, it's fine. I am, you know, so I was I was kind of going
[Amit Varma]: through the middle stage. And you have a section on the right about popular pieces. And one
[Amit Varma]: of the ones linked there was, actually, I think what you told a lot also was your review
[Amit Varma]: of Rang De Basanti, where I'll read out this, I'll read out these bits from it, because
[Amit Varma]: I really enjoyed it. And I will somehow make it lead to a question because otherwise, what
[Amit Varma]: could justify my reading them out.
[Amit Varma]: Amir Khan's latest foray into Indian history is without question a cinematic venture of
[Amit Varma]: remarkable daring. It left me completely stunned. In almost two decades of watching Bollywood
[Amit Varma]: productions, I have never come across such preposterous drivel as that served up in the
[Amit Varma]: second half of this film. One reason for this, of course, is that Rang De Basanti takes itself
[Amit Varma]: so seriously. And then later you say, what follows not only stretches the boundaries
[Amit Varma]: of logic, it also sends out a dangerous and incendiary message, stop code. And the message,
[Amit Varma]: of course, is that the end justifies the means that once you decide that violence is justified,
[Amit Varma]: you can just carry out violence for any damn thing. And this leads me to the question of,
[Amit Varma]: you know, when it comes to art and literature, you know, it's it's perfectly obvious that
[Amit Varma]: you cannot judge a book on the basis of what you feel about a particular character books,
[Amit Varma]: literature films, have unpleasant characters who do unpleasant, stupid things. And that's
[Amit Varma]: the whole thing. You're placing a mirror on the human condition. And it is like that.
[Amit Varma]: So you can't judge a film because of what a character or a book does. And yet, in this
[Amit Varma]: case, I agree with you completely. Or in the case of what was that film Arjun Reddy, which
[Unknown]: showed that deeply misogynist guy, which was made into some Hindi film also. And in those
[Amit Varma]: films, these the way these people are just portrayed as heroes, that this is how you
[Amit Varma]: should behave. And so in that sense, this is not art, art or literature. Literature
[Amit Varma]: if one is to be pompous about this, and we discussed pomposity earlier, and Robert McCrum
[Amit Varma]: would probably not approve of this. So the question there is that, when do you draw the
[Amit Varma]: line? Where do you draw the line and say that it's okay for Nabokov to write a book about
[Amit Varma]: a character who's into young girls, even though in real life, he would, of course, not approve
[Amit Varma]: of it, because it's a character in literature, and you're, you know, shining a light on the
[Amit Varma]: human condition. But, you know, somewhere else, it becomes a problem, because people
[Guest]: are going to take this as a model, and you're kind of glorifying this kind of behavior.
[Guest]: It's interesting you bring that up, because obviously, I don't think I would write that
[Guest]: today. So I might even be disagreeing slightly with my past self. But I'm interested to remember
[Guest]: that I wrote this in the context of writing about a film and not about a book. And there
[Guest]: is a responsibility, you know, you can be much more provoking and damaging in a mass
[Guest]: medium than you can in something like a novel. So it's built into the art form, you know,
[Guest]: that you cannot, it's very rare that novels can change and damage a culture in the same
[Guest]: way that a badly made film can. I mean, you walk around India today, and in lots of small
[Guest]: towns, sometimes they give lectures and stuff, and lots of kids come along. In the end, I
[Guest]: feel like asking them a question, like before we leave a multiple choice question, your
[Guest]: personal style, your manner and your swagger, who does it lead to? Is it Ranveer Singh,
[Guest]: Salman Khan, Virat Kohli, or name your choice, A, B, C, D. You know, there are certain models
[Guest]: of masculinity that films can project. And even sometimes the bad faith is that they
[Guest]: pretend as if they're criticizing it, saying that by showing it, we want to draw attention
[Guest]: to it's all done in very bad faith, you can see. And freedom of expression still means
[Guest]: that they have to come out in a culture, there's no way of prescribing them. But at least one
[Guest]: must push back in writing about them saying this is a real power to push back and set
[Guest]: a narrative back or to disrupt a certain path of progress and you know, present an idea
[Guest]: of it's the glamour of cinema that the end is his biggest draw. That figure on the screen
[Guest]: is not six feet tall, he's 30-40 feet tall. And you know, the camera angle is always from
[Guest]: below, there's a certain mechanics of cinema that actually works to make certain effects
[Guest]: possible. That's why it's amazing that India is so Bollywood obsessed, yet, you'll find
[Guest]: half the time you go to a dinner party somewhere, people will say, oh, I saw Shah Rukh, he's
[Guest]: so short in real life, I could never believe, I just couldn't recognize him. The same face
[Guest]: but the height is three inches. So that is the thing about cinema. And also, you know,
[Guest]: Indian Indian mass culture is dominated by Bollywood as perhaps it should be, or by cinema,
[Guest]: we are a cinema caters to everybody. And there are many wonderful things about the shared
[Guest]: experience of sitting in the big screen with other Indians watching this. But I agree,
[Guest]: those artworks, the mass forms have greater responsibility. And it's too easy for them
[Guest]: to get away with just pandering to a certain set ideal, which also comes in the way of
[Guest]: like political and religious prejudices, you know, it's so easy to just turn them back
[Guest]: and say, well, this is how society is. I also find the same problem with advertising. And
[Guest]: it's too easy for all these things to say, we just represent what things are. I'm sorry,
[Guest]: this is not a good enough answer.
[Amit Varma]: Fair enough. I mean, but that's the exact argument that you're using, by the way, yes,
[Guest]: is a reason censorship exists. I know, I know. So let's keep using the argument without letting
[Guest]: censorship come in. Yeah. And we leave it there as a midway point, perhaps is what I'm
[Amit Varma]: saying. Correct. And, you know, use it as a, you know, if films in India are treated as an instruction manual
[Amit Varma]: for life, then let's have a good instruction manual is what you're saying. But an artist
[Amit Varma]: would say that, hey, wait a minute, you are an ivory tower novelist, where you are not,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you have whatever characters you want in your books. But, but yeah, I totally
[Guest]: get what you're saying. They're free to make the films they want, we are free to criticise
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: Let's say if they said that, then that's where the conversation stops. You have to either
[Guest]: they or you have to find some new point at which to engage again, or you just leave each
[Amit Varma]: other be and continue on. You need to disagree. Yeah. You cannot. Yeah. And by this whole
[Amit Varma]: masculine role model thing, I remember I did an episode with Shrena Bhattacharya in January,
[Amit Varma]: where she made the very interesting point, the episode is called the loneliness of the
[Amit Varma]: Indian woman. And the interesting point she made was that while the role model for most
[Amit Varma]: men in terms of how to behave is Salman Khan, the person women would want them to behave
[Guest]: like is Shah Rukh Khan.
[Guest]: A very deep and insightful point, I think using popular culture to critique popular
[Guest]: culture is a certain art of its own. And this is a very good book. And just that one sentence
[Guest]: is so striking, immediately clarifies something, isn't it? Yeah, the gap between the expectations,
[Guest]: if you're this side of gender or the other side. Very interesting. I'd agree. Wouldn't
[Guest]: you?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, you're right in the sense that if you want to capture the essence of a larger point
[Amit Varma]: that she makes through the book, that this captures it. And this is such a deep disconnect
[Amit Varma]: in our culture, that what men want to be is so different from what women want men to be.
[Guest]: Although I know at least two women who are very passionate Salman Khan fans and can't
[Amit Varma]: think of him as God.
[Amit Varma]: But would they want the men in their lives to behave like that is another question.
[Amit Varma]: They are single, you're right.
[Guest]: They haven't found someone as good as Salman to...
[Amit Varma]: So as we get close to winding up, because we should soon break for lunch as well. You've
[Amit Varma]: got this passage in your book where you talk about how you change through your 30s where
[Amit Varma]: you write, quote, so long resistant to being drawn out as reticent and impassive as a closed
[Amit Varma]: book made nervous and even jealous by people more at ease with life than I. I now took
[Amit Varma]: pleasure and even pride in reaching out to people. I tried to leave people in no doubt
[Amit Varma]: that I love them, both by concrete action and exertion, and sometimes by discrete inaction,
[Amit Varma]: such as by never judging them on their reading. Difficult spiritually ennobling work when
[Amit Varma]: someone's favorite novel is the alchemist's a fountainhead one night at the call center.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote. Tell me a bit about how you've changed because you know, what's happened
[Amit Varma]: is we were friends back then we used to hang a lot. I think, in essence, I see you as the
[Amit Varma]: same cheerful, optimistic person who's passionate about books. But you obviously must have changed
[Amit Varma]: a lot in these years. So, so tell me.
[Guest]: Yes, I even think perhaps one of the reasons where for four, five years, we sort of drifted
[Guest]: away into own spaces, what we needed that to grow into our own selves. And there's such
[Guest]: a thing as you know, a friendship, which is too intense, and we can rejoin our conversation
[Guest]: in life, catching up again on the different points on the road. And at some level, I kind
[Guest]: of felt you know, my world was too narrow. And I relied so much on my close friends that
[Guest]: I never met any new ones. And it was a problem. And I needed to break out of it. And what
[Guest]: I was most frustrated by was that I could only make friends in my own class. I mean,
[Guest]: we both I even started to make friends, deep friendship with people who are much richer
[Guest]: than me. You know, so it was a problem on both sides. And I think in this way, I was
[Guest]: cured of this problem by the restaurant because after seeing me coming day after day, I sleep
[Guest]: about this restaurant, Prabha Devi, I wrote a book about this, the restaurant. And when
[Guest]: the waiters began to see me as their friend was the day I realized I've somehow without
[Guest]: even consciously wanting to have broken a barrier in my life. And from then on, I've
[Guest]: had very little trouble ever dealing, of course, there's still that hierarchy, but I find I've
[Guest]: very little trouble dealing with people in these asymmetrical power positions in India.
[Guest]: And somewhere I began to realize that in the end, your desire to write novels is actually
[Guest]: a sublimation of your desire. Perhaps, I mean, Shruti Kapila was on your program the last
[Guest]: time around, and she's a very deep student of psychoanalysis and there's a lot of that
[Guest]: in her book as well. Is that desire to write novels basically a sublimation of a desire
[Guest]: to unite with everybody in your country? You want to know what the world feels like from
[Guest]: everybody's point of view, what a cup of tea feels like to a cab driver, what a chocolate
[Guest]: mousse or a bottle of Bollinger feels like to Veer Sanghvi and to the industrialist or
[Guest]: a kid drinking for the first time. All these tastes, all these ideas, all these histories,
[Guest]: all these interactions, all the love affairs, you want to know what they write in letters.
[Guest]: You're almost like an omnivorous, that is a desire. Obviously, you're not going to get
[Guest]: anywhere close to it, but boiled down to something that you can actionable in your life, it kind
[Guest]: of means there's no time to waste and you can't even sit in one place. Of course, you
[Guest]: can sit in one place to write, but the rest of the day, you've got to call people, get
[Guest]: around, bring them over, you go over, travel, meet, go to places you've never seen. And
[Guest]: somewhere I suddenly, like having cottoned on for good or bad onto this thought, I'm
[Guest]: still unable to let go of it. And I feel excited every single day by this, you know, this thing
[Guest]: that we've been given a great inheritance, not in the formulaic way in which you think
[Guest]: about it. I just find going out into India very exciting and for all the flaws of Indian
[Guest]: people, and there's so many, we are still a very attractive people. And the more you
[Guest]: travel around the world, also you come back to thinking there's some things about India,
[Guest]: you know, the hospitality, the willingness to sit and talk, the ability to give time
[Guest]: to people. I just feel it could clear out two or three things about the Indian mindset,
[Guest]: you know, the problem in talking across gender, some things about class and caste. We are
[Guest]: on our way to, you know, like a really like may a million flowers bloom moment. For instance,
[Guest]: I see an Indian love and I see young people holding hands. I kind of feel tremendously
[Guest]: pleased to see this transformation. I think when you and I were 18, to hold hands on Indian
[Guest]: street was an incendiary gesture. Everybody would look at you. Now, in many Indian cities,
[Guest]: they don't, on the Delhi metro, you know, this street is normal. That's a transformation
[Guest]: to cherish and to, you know, it's not come a moment too soon. Thousands of years have
[Guest]: passed before it happened. And all these things I feel, you know, I know we are in a time
[Guest]: of like repression, hate, otherization. Somewhere below it, I feel at a smaller level, another
[Guest]: few hundred million Indians. We're only in a minority because we're such a big country,
[Guest]: but we are moving towards a greater integration and towards a realization of the ideals of
[Guest]: the founding fathers and mothers of the Indian Republic on a scale much deeper than they
[Guest]: themselves with their limited lives could imagine. You know, and that is what progress
[Guest]: means and that is what democracy means. And in that way, I think it's very exciting. You
[Guest]: know, sometimes in lectures, I say what is common between even our grandparents and you
[Guest]: and I, and we are now middle-aged people, young people look at us as old perhaps and
[Guest]: call us uncle. But even you and I share with them this common frame. We are citizens of
[Guest]: the first century of Indian democracy, 1947-2047. All the things we do now, if the world survives
[Guest]: and democracy survives, we'll have consequent ripple effects for hundreds of years to come.
[Guest]: The little changes that we made in the light of our ideas of our time. And that's an exciting
[Guest]: space to be in, isn't it? It gives you some agencies, a desire to live, a desire to meet,
[Guest]: to talk, to find out things. And in that way, I feel very grateful both for space, the gift
[Guest]: of the right space and the right time. I think to be born in India in the year 1980, 1973-74,
[Guest]: we saw socialism, we saw capitalism, we saw whatever world we are living in now, globalism,
[Guest]: internationalism, linked up to one another. They're a wonderful frame to go up and down
[Guest]: those lines. It's like Virat to Churchgate or the Harbour Line or Central Line all together.
[Guest]: Just keep travelling, using your memories, adding new things to them. It's enough. And
[Guest]: in that way, I kind of feel, you know, I think if this is our closing thought, I would like
[Guest]: to ask you a question in return. I want it to be a surprise question. I want you to not
[Guest]: think about it too much. Just give me a spot answer. And if later you think it was the
[Guest]: wrong answer and it was the opposite, we can always go back to it later. As I understand
[Guest]: it, one of the deepest differences between you and me in terms of personal outlook is
[Guest]: that you are quite fiercely and consciously and deliberately and deeply an atheist and
[Guest]: you don't want the human frame to involve God and you think it's a complication and
[Guest]: that leads us into other directions. It is also damaging religions of this history. And
[Guest]: I, on the other hand, kind of older I grow, feel more and more like, you know, like my
[Guest]: Hindu faith or my inheritance or the history of Hindu philosophy. And in general, the idea
[Guest]: of religion is very important to me. And I would say on, in, pressed to the point, I
[Guest]: would say I am basically religious and I cannot, for all that I want to understand the problems
[Guest]: of religion, I cannot disinherit myself from my religious inheritance. But if you can leave
[Guest]: that difference aside and won't you say that given your life and mine and where you've
[Guest]: lived in the city, we were something too. How do I put it? In the end, your religion
[Guest]: and mine is Bombay. The way we understood the city, the what we saw in it, the things
[Guest]: we know through it, the persons we become through it, that it has no code or whatever,
[Guest]: but you know it when you see it. And that is, that is our faith.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, I'll give a two part answer. It's a lovely question. And I'll no doubt think more
[Amit Varma]: about this even after this recording. But as you want an off the cuff answer, I can
[Amit Varma]: think of a two part answer, which the second part is two parts. So now the first part is
[Amit Varma]: this that I'm not a militant atheist in the sense that at one point in time, I would have
[Amit Varma]: argued that if someone believes in religion, they are by definition irrational and cannot
[Amit Varma]: be trusted, because obviously, there's no proof for God existing and all of that. Today,
[Amit Varma]: I don't think that is a case in the sense that I agree with you. Yes, today, I don't
[Amit Varma]: think that is a case because sure, I mean, and I'll link to an article I wrote about
[Amit Varma]: an essay I wrote about this, where you know, which makes a distinction that atheism is
[Amit Varma]: not a belief, it is an absence of belief, just as not collecting stamps is an absence
[Amit Varma]: of a hobby. It's not a hobby. You know, no one says my hobby is not collecting stamps.
[Amit Varma]: But my sense is that I understand that human beings are frail, that as you pointed out
[Amit Varma]: earlier that reason cannot solve all our problems, human beings are frail. And the truth is that
[Amit Varma]: we're going to die and life is meaningless. So how do you get how do you how do you get
[Amit Varma]: by? Right? And the point is, we all do choose our own delusions. Somebody else's delusion
[Amit Varma]: may be religion. But I have no doubt have a delusion which I choose, perhaps it is a
[Amit Varma]: delusion that my, you know, mortality is something I don't need to deal with right now. And it'll
[Amit Varma]: come later. But the very fact that I can sit here and have this conversation and all of
[Amit Varma]: that, we all need crutches in a sense to get by. So I understand that I am not even condescending
[Amit Varma]: and saying that this is an inferior crutch. We are humans, we are frail, I get why religion
[Amit Varma]: is there. I also get that many belief systems today, which would not be called religions,
[Amit Varma]: which are maybe ideologies have qualities that are religion like. And so in that sense,
[Amit Varma]: I'm not, you know, militant in that sense. Now, as far as being a religious person is
[Amit Varma]: concerned, my sense is and this goes to what you were saying just before this also, is
[Amit Varma]: that you are perhaps focusing on the positive aspects of religion. And of course, there
[Amit Varma]: are positive aspects of religion, like the sense of community, you know, different aspects
[Amit Varma]: of different festivals, which bring us together, and so on and so forth. And I get all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And we need that in our lives, we can't be atomized. In fact, that's a critique some
[Amit Varma]: people often make of individualism that, oh, we can't be atomized human beings. But the
[Amit Varma]: whole point is, my argument always is that not, you know, atomization is a straw man.
[Amit Varma]: The point is, we should all be individual, free to engage with others. Voluntary interaction
[Amit Varma]: is a key thing there. So I have no issue with anybody being religious per se. But I have
[Amit Varma]: a massive problem with organized religion, any organized religion. I mean, and I think
[Amit Varma]: that so many of the ills that are in our nation today, like earlier, you spoke about one or
[Amit Varma]: two minor things. They're not minor things, especially in the context of today, you know,
[Amit Varma]: things like class, caste, gender, and especially the anti Muslim sentiment that is, you know,
[Amit Varma]: is tearing this country apart. It's not a minor thing. It's a big deal. It's always
[Amit Varma]: been there in our society. Similarly, I think the aspects that you like about our society,
[Amit Varma]: the fact that we almost without thinking about it assimilate so much, we are like this delightful
[Amit Varma]: khichri of influences from everywhere, and so on and so forth. You know, and I think
[Amit Varma]: that is also something that predates the Indian Republic. You know, both of these predate
[Amit Varma]: the Indian Republic. But the point is that right now, it's hard for me to be as optimistic
[Amit Varma]: as you because I see these negative things and feel so strongly about them. And I think
[Amit Varma]: that organized religion also has that problem that I just see so many issues with it that
[Amit Varma]: I don't really want to elaborate upon. But where do all these issues come from the misogyny,
[Amit Varma]: sexism, caste, you know, all these come from organized religion, you know, so.
[Guest]: But that's why I was slightly shifting the platform to something more sudden and more
[Guest]: about religion being Bombay. Yes, our private religion, something that you know, like, has
[Guest]: this thought ever come to you that everything in life you owe to a certain city or what
[Guest]: you learned here or that there's some ways of being here that you feel that you know,
[Guest]: are fundamental to who you are, and that your life is a continuation on down that river.
[Amit Varma]: I think that's a deep thought. I think Bombay can mean different things to different people.
[Amit Varma]: So if I sort of think of Bombay as meaning a certain ethic of life that you go your way,
[Amit Varma]: I go mine, we don't bother each other. And we trade freely, we live freely, all of that,
[Amit Varma]: I can buy that. But Bombay is a lot more than that. I don't know if it's so much as Bombay.
[Amit Varma]: But I think it's a little more cosmopolitan and globalized like that. Unfortunately, I
[Amit Varma]: can't help it. My biggest influences are all sort of Western influences, in a sense, from
[Amit Varma]: the Enlightenment and the thinkers I admire, whether it's Adam Smith, who, as you so rightly
[Amit Varma]: point out in your book is a lot more than just Invisible Hand, or, you know, Hayek and
[Amit Varma]: so on. So I'm a mix of everything. Of course, there is a core that is Indian and there'll
[Amit Varma]: be a core that is Bombay. But I don't know if it was you who introduced me to Constantine
[Amit Varma]: Cavafy, but he's got this great poem called The City. Yes. And that speaks to the sentiment,
[Amit Varma]: which I have actually read out on this podcast before. So can I ask you to read it out? Sure.
[Guest]: The City by Constantine Cavafy. You said, I'll go to another country, go to another
[Guest]: shore, find another city better than this one. Whatever I try to do is fated to turn
[Guest]: out wrong. And my heart lies buried like something dead. How long can I let my mind moulder in
[Guest]: this place? Wherever I turn, wherever I look, I see the black ruins of my life here where
[Unknown]: I've spent so many years, wasted them, destroyed them totally. You won't find a new country,
[Guest]: won't find another shore. The city will always pursue you. You will walk the same streets,
[Unknown]: grow old in the same neighborhoods, turn grey in the same houses. You'll always end up in
[Unknown]: this city. Don't hope for things elsewhere. There's no ship for you. There's no road.
[Unknown]: Now that you've wasted your life here in the small corner, you've destroyed it everywhere
[Amit Varma]: in the world. Yeah, it's just a fantastic poem. I think I read it out in my episode
[Amit Varma]: with Sarah Rai. And yeah, and in my episode with Amitabh, you would have remembered, I
[Amit Varma]: asked him, what is this Gangauli? In the sense, what is this notion of home? Yes. And I think
[Amit Varma]: you've indicated that your notion of home to a significant extent is Bombay. Yes, between
[Guest]: literature and Bombay, I think these are the two overriding, and there could be also literature
[Guest]: in Bombay, Bombay in literature, etc. You can keep on mixing them. But I think these
[Guest]: are the two main currents flowing through my life. And they keep on mixing in you. Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, your book is called My Country is Literature. So you could also say my city
[Amit Varma]: is Bombay. A couple of last questions before we kind of end. And it's actually two questions,
[Amit Varma]: but I think they lead to the same place. One is what advice would you give to the young
[Amit Varma]: Chandra Haas, maybe the Chandra Haas in Cambridge in 2002, who has just come across that ad
[Amit Varma]: for writing a review, what advice would you give him? Which feeds into a different way
[Amit Varma]: of phrasing, I think the same question. What advice would you give to the young reader
[Amit Varma]: and writer today, who is listening to this and thinking of a life in literature?
[Guest]: Well, as for myself, you know, I think it's always, it's strangely, it's somewhat arrogant
[Guest]: to try to preach to your former self, because only by learning what like, but by finding
[Guest]: out, blundering through what you did not know, do you arrive to who you are today, you cannot
[Guest]: return to your past and cut your own roots out. You can obviously criticize some bits
[Guest]: of ourselves, as I've done in the introduction of my book saying I was almost too bookish
[Guest]: and I treated literature like a crutch, rather than a place of release and a place of freedom
[Guest]: as a place as a way of engaging with the world. So I don't think, strangely enough, I'm quite
[Guest]: content with my past, you know, I don't think I've changed anything about my life. Even
[Guest]: the bad things that happened. I'm quite, you know, I kind of feel I've made my peace with
[Guest]: everything and even those who have left or disappeared, I kind of feel I can mentally
[Guest]: carry on a conversation. So I have no advice to give other than, you know, perhaps let
[Guest]: go a little bit. I think I was too intense and didn't know how to enjoy myself. And it
[Guest]: was part of the tension I grew up with living in a very insecure home. And I again have
[Guest]: some empathy for that, you know, took me a long years. And when I maybe that's why I'm
[Guest]: making up for lost time. Every day is a sorrow party these days in my life, much of the time,
[Guest]: including today. And for young people, you know, it's a different time to be a young
[Guest]: writer today than it was 20 years ago. Things have changed a lot. So precisely for that
[Guest]: reason, when I hear a young person today saying I want to become a writer, I have more respect
[Guest]: for them. It's so much more easy to want to become something else that if after all that
[Guest]: you say books are what means the most to you, it shows that you're serious. It's much, much
[Guest]: easier to learn to become a writer today than it was 20 years ago. So that bit is good.
[Guest]: And I think young people also don't have the hang ups, especially in English about writing
[Guest]: in English that people our generation are just a touch above us did about writing a
[Guest]: certain way, trying to please certain people. Every young Indian writer now writes their
[Guest]: own English with complete confidence and it's very nice to see. I like reading Indian books,
[Guest]: even mediocre ones for this reason. It's their own English. It's not a pretend English.
[Guest]: And other than that, you know, we live in a fantastic, our country is a library and
[Guest]: your library also is a limitless library. You know that what you see in a bookshop is
[Guest]: only a fraction of hang around in, you know, go to Fleur Fountain, Blossom's bookshop,
[Guest]: old bookshops everywhere, put together a library of the great books in the last 60, 70 years
[Guest]: and it'll give you an India over and above the India that you see in front of you. When
[Guest]: you join together these Indias of land and library, you'll suddenly have such a powerful
[Guest]: point of view on your own life that you will both live more interestingly and write better.
[Guest]: And the last bit's the technical side. Now, you know, once you have a command of a language,
[Guest]: no need to be in a great hurry over it. Indian literature is about communicating, not necessarily
[Guest]: being right. And you will get that 10, 15 years down the line. Enjoy the ride till then
[Guest]: and remember to take pleasure in every day and do a bit of work, even if not at your
[Guest]: desk every day. Every day, you must go forward in some way, even if by reading and making
[Guest]: some notes, you don't have to write every day. It's not required. Go forward a little
[Guest]: bit by little bit, just like with so many other things, you know, in the end, you won't
[Guest]: realize how far you've come by not noticing where you're going.
[Amit Varma]: And also something I think that both of us have experienced with young people, that boss,
[Guest]: the years pass very fast. The years pass very freaking fast. Don't waste it on petty things.
[Guest]: Yes, absolutely. I couldn't say the second that more, you know, when you're 25, it looks
[Guest]: like life goes on forever. At 42, you realize you already feel you're running out of time
[Guest]: for all the things you want to do, all the people you want to see, all the things you
[Guest]: could not say to people. So that way, literature is a life intensifying device. Let's put it
[Guest]: that way. So within that, it has a certain code, which is that you don't waste time.
[Amit Varma]: That's such a lovely way to put it, like intensifying device. And on that note, see, I end all my
[Amit Varma]: episodes asking my guests to recommend books, films, music that they love. And especially
[Amit Varma]: in your case, that absolutely has to be the last demand I make of you. Like what are your
[Guest]: desert island books, or films or music or what you just want the whole world to read?
[Guest]: In one quick stretch, I can read off the main influences of my life. Musically, from the
[Guest]: age of 18 till age of 42, I've had only one predominant influence, although I've had many
[Guest]: others below it. I like film soundtracks, because I find the absence of words helps
[Guest]: me compose in the mornings, I like to listen to music. But from the time of 18, I've always
[Guest]: been a fan of the Pakistani rock band Junoon. And it has never changed. And I keep listening
[Guest]: to the same songs on loop year after year and finding new meanings in them. I even find
[Guest]: as a way of interpreting the subcontinent and that Sufi philosophy and even the, I'm
[Guest]: even willing to defend the point that Salman Ahmad is one of the greatest rock guitarists
[Guest]: in history, just like some Indian novelists are not regarded, disregarded, so was he.
[Guest]: But every solo in there has a meaning for me. And I really love this private archive,
[Guest]: you know, 25 year engagement with the repertoire. And cinema wise, it's very variegated. I like,
[Guest]: in general, I like artworks which are optimistic, cheerful and full of the chaos and comedy
[Guest]: of life. I have a definite bias towards comedy and a sense that life basically is a tragedy
[Guest]: that you must live as a comedy in order to make it bearable. I think that is my root
[Guest]: philosophy. You know, you never know when the next terribly painful or traumatic thing
[Guest]: will happen, but you kind of have to bolster yourself and make the day cheerful. And, you
[Guest]: know, verbal repartee is so, so, so energizing and so much fun. I like comedies like that
[Guest]: as well, you know, we just talk between people. So in books, I think the main representative
[Guest]: of the spirit in Indian literature is an almost unread writer these days, Verrier Elwynn.
[Guest]: I think his books and his studies of tribal India are enormously fascinating. As somebody
[Guest]: who only lived to be 62, he came to India in his 20s, came to be a priest, ended up
[Guest]: becoming more tribal than even the tribals and lived in small settlements going from
[Guest]: one place every two, three years. The tribal life of Verrier Elwynn, his autobiography,
[Guest]: to me is such an enormously amazing book, being cheerful under continuous stress, misery,
[Guest]: pressure and material deprivation, which are voluntarily taken up. And finding beauty in
[Guest]: the smallest things and in trees, flowers, in human faces. So, to me, it's a great, great
[Guest]: Indian book by somebody who is not Indian. And in writing my favorite novelist or fiction
[Guest]: writer of almost anywhere, and someone I admire deeply personally, and in an imaginary dinner
[Guest]: party, this will be almost the first guest on my list, along with a few others, you know,
[Guest]: one makes a mix of live and people from the past. But Adam Smith would definitely be one
[Guest]: again for someone who, like we know, has that cheerful spirit while realizing that life
[Guest]: is very difficult. That mix of toughness and good cheer is very appealing. But in the end,
[Guest]: I think Bivuti Bhushan Bandopadhyay has a combination of wisdom, naivete, wonder at
[Guest]: the beauty of nature, love of the different voices of society, that adda kind of feeling
[Guest]: of sitting down to gossip with everybody, putting yourself in the mind of many kinds
[Guest]: of characters, including children, notoriously hard to do for novelists who are adult, you
[Guest]: know, they make all sorts of things, but can't really get to it. Bivuti Bhushan's children
[Guest]: are really children, and his adults are really adults. And his outlook on life is very, very
[Guest]: poetic and that mix of a love of the created world of culture, i.e. the city, and behind
[Guest]: that the long term world of nature, the forest. Few Indian novelists balance a love of both
[Guest]: these worlds in such an equal and exquisite proportion as Bivuti Bhushan. And you can't
[Guest]: tell, if you read a single book by Bivuti Bhushan, you can't tell, sometimes he looks
[Guest]: like he's a city person, and in some other stories, he looks like a village, a real initiate
[Guest]: of rural life. And to me, this is a complete perspective, you know, all kinds of points
[Guest]: of view on life you can find in his books. And to me, again, that idea of trying to merge
[Guest]: with all of India, from the point of view of the other party, is to me most perfectly
[Guest]: expressed in, not as an explicit philosophy, but in between the spaces of the stories.
[Guest]: In his work, so in the end, you know, like a page or two of Bivuti Bhushan a day should
[Guest]: be part of the Indian constitution. After that, maybe we won't have so many boundaries
[Guest]: against each other. There's another way of looking, come on, sit, let's have a cheroot
[Guest]: or a cigarette or a cup of tea, we'll work it out.
[Amit Varma]: Fantastic. And, you know, you spoke about liking comedies more. And I remember this
[Amit Varma]: old quote, I forget who it's by, where the quote goes, the world is a tragedy to those
[Amit Varma]: who feel, a comedy to those who think. So I guess you have identified yourself as a
[Amit Varma]: thinker there. Just in passing, who else would you invite to the dinner party? Bivuti Bhushan
[Amit Varma]: is your chief guest sitting at the head of the table, there's Adam Smith, who else?
[Guest]: Yes. Among women, I always loved Irene Namirovsky, you know, not such a well known writer even
[Guest]: today, but I find that extremely fascinating. Killed at the age of 39 in the Holocaust,
[Guest]: but again, the writer of some ferociously ruthless books, which are amazing in the intensity
[Guest]: of observation, great training to be a writer. My favourite first sentence in the entire
[Guest]: history of novels is from Suite Francaise. It's only four words long. You know, you open
[Guest]: a novel, you think it's going to be some introduction to life. It just says, hot, thought the Parisians.
[Guest]: Somewhere in Paris, that's all you need to establish your point of view, the setting,
[Guest]: the locale, everything, and a communal consciousness of phenomenon. There's not an individual that's
[Guest]: being represented. Hot, comma, thought the Parisians, and you're on your way. The cart
[Guest]: of the train has set off on his journey. So, I found myself so intrigued by some mysteries
[Guest]: about her that I'd love to see her, especially, you know, and we must invite people like that
[Guest]: who left life too early. And I think, you know, you cannot live, be an Indian today,
[Guest]: especially even in our time without having both Gandhi and Nehru come over, even to debate
[Guest]: among themselves like they had in the time. That way, even in Elvin's book, there's an
[Guest]: amazing passage at the end where he talks about the differences in philosophy, in the
[Guest]: thought of Gandhi, Nehru, and Tagore, where each one of them did something that the other
[Guest]: didn't. And merely that trident of explications, so amazing, you think just the fact that these
[Guest]: three lived in dialogue with each other was a much bigger thing than anything that they
[Guest]: themselves did. And so, we've covered literature, we've covered poetry, politics, somebody from
[Guest]: food, or, you know, some person from one's past will be different from you and from me.
[Guest]: And perhaps someone, also someone one hates or really dislikes in the hope that such an
[Guest]: evening will be the day when that now, especially, I think I would not have answered this question
[Guest]: like this till about a few years ago. But now, as a result of having grown older and
[Guest]: also as a result of how we're living in India today, this would be an important, the shadow,
[Guest]: the shadow, the other would be a part of whoever it is in your life.
[Amit Varma]: Which hated person would you call?
[Guest]: I wouldn't say I actually hate somebody, but somebody whom you felt you saw doing something
[Guest]: that you couldn't forgive, or that you felt that, you know, the arrogance, the brutality
[Guest]: such that you can't feel it would ever say something to them and treat them like a human
[Guest]: being. Even there, sometimes, perhaps there could be some space where even they could
[Guest]: change and you could change, or you could change together the way you cannot by yourself.
[Guest]: Some mysterious person, let's leave that out as a, or some traumatic figure from your life,
[Guest]: you know, God knows there's enough, enough and more of those people who said something
[Guest]: to you, cut you off, destroyed something about, maybe they couldn't help it or, you know,
[Guest]: who knows the full story. That's the whole, the whole logic of the novel. You never know
[Guest]: the full story.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe you could call Hitler and serve only non-veg, because he was a vegetarian, right?
[Amit Varma]: Was he? I didn't know that. He seemed like a very non-veg sort of person.
[Unknown]: People contain multitudes. Yeah, yeah. So Hitler was a vegetarian. So call him serve
[Unknown]: only non-veg. Or call Ambedkar and seat him next to Gandhi and place him such that every
[Amit Varma]: time Gandhi wants something, he has to ask Ambedkar to pass it to him.
[Guest]: Yes, alcohol would be served. If you are a non-drinker, I'm sorry to say that the host
[Amit Varma]: decides the rules of the party. Have a drink for once, Gandhiji.
[Amit Varma]: He was wild enough without it. But yeah, dude, Chandrahas, thank you so much for this great
[Guest]: conversation. If we actually have a dinner party, you'll call me.
[Guest]: Yes, yes. We must do it. We haven't done one for a long time.
[Amit Varma]: We must. And yeah, thanks so much. This was great.
[Guest]: No, no, my pleasure. So thank you. I mean, The Seen and the Unseen is a great title.
[Guest]: And I must say in concluding, I don't know if anyone has talked about this wonderful
[Guest]: cup that you have for your You're holding an old piece of merchandise.
[Guest]: Oh, it was a merchandise. It's a great idea. The flag of India, but actually it's cut up
[Guest]: as a jigsaw puzzle. As a metaphor for thinking about how to be an Indian, I think I've never
[Guest]: seen an image, frankly, as provoking and as deep as this. So really lovely. I'd love a
[Guest]: cup like this to put right in front of my desk. Well, I'll send you one the next time
[Unknown]: we make any more of these. This was a cover image of an old episode I did with Ram Guha.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll link that from the show notes if people want to see the precise image.
[Guest]: It was an absolute pleasure. Now, please clear away the furniture. I've stored one ball from
[Guest]: those days. We've got to have a test match. Come on.
[Amit Varma]: If you produce a ball, I'll call you a bluff. Okay, thank you so much.
[Amit Varma]: Did you enjoy this episode of The Seen and The Unseen? If so, would you like to support
[Amit Varma]: the production of the show? You can go over to seenunseen.in slash support and contribute
[Amit Varma]: any amount you like to keep this podcast alive and kicking. Thank you.